 I have never engaged in class warfare. I'm very much in favor of tax cuts for middle-income and lower-income Americans.  I'm deeply concerned about a kind of class warfare that's going on right now. It's unfortunate. There's a growing gap between the haves and the have-nots in America. And that gap is growing, and it's unfortunately divided up along ethnic lines.  I feel very strongly that we ought to have middle-income and lower-income taxes, and we'll be getting into it, I'm sure, later in this program. Mine are basically comparable to Governor Bush's -- in some cases, far better.  But I'm not sure we need to give two-thirds of that tax cut -- of that money -- to the wealthiest 10 percent of America, and that's what Tax Notes, a well-respected tax journal, says is the case this morning.  But more importantly, there's a fundamental difference here. I believe we must save Social Security, we must pay down the debt, we have to make an investment in Medicare. For us to put all of the tax cuts -- all of the surplus into tax cuts, I think is not a conservative effort.  I think it's a mistake. I think we should put that money into allowing Americans to be sure that their Social Security System will be there when they retire; that Medicare is helped; and most of all, let's pay down that $5.6 trillion debt we've laid on future generations of Americans.  Sure. Two quick points: Your tax plan over the next five years not only spends all of the surplus, it spends $20 billion in addition to that. I'm sure we'll have that figured out. But this idea that somehow, if the money is left in order to salvage the Social Security for America and Medicare and the debt -- that -- you don't understand the role of the president of the United States. The president of the United States will veto bills -- will veto bills that spend too much.  This present president is vetoing bills that don't spend enough and are forcing Congress to spend more. I'll veto bills that force Congress to spend less. That's what being president of the United States is all about.  You going to leave mine out?  I would not.  Never. Next question. [<i>applause</i>]  By the way...[<i>crosstalk</i>]  I would like -- I would like...  Sure.  I would, but I am very confident that I could have taken several measures that were not taken.  I think that, if you want to look at this particular situation, it's fraught with more ramifications than just the hijacking.  One, they landed in Afghanistan, a friendly government, the Taliban, to the country of Pakistan, arousing suspicions as far as cooperation between Pakistan and the Afghans, because it stopped to refuel on the way, where it should have not been allowed to take off again. I'd have made sure that it didn't take off again and not reach its final destination.  Because I would have had my people there tracking the flight when it was on the various legs and prevented it from taking off by shooting out the tires once it was on the ground. I would have had a galvanized American forces in that area...  Absolute -- well, first of all, I'd have had my air forces flying wing on that thing as soon as it landed. It would not have taken off again and it would not have reached Afghanistan.  The second thing that's important about this issue, even though perhaps you don't imply it, is that this is growing closer and closer to a flashpoint between two countries that have developed nuclear weapons and that are growing closer and closer to a brinksmanship situation which then is in our vital national security interest. And it is in our interest to make -- to do everything in our power to see that there's some settlement of the Kashmir problem, because that's the genesis of most of these difficulties that exist between those two countries.  My colleagues have spoken very eloquently on this issue, except to remind you again in New York harbor there's a statue and the inscription on it says: "Send me your poor, your tired, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free."  That boy's mother gave her life so that he could breathe free. And as all my colleagues said: Let the father come to the U.S. of A and stay a few days -- trip to Disney World -- and enjoy -- seriously enjoy freedom, that boy would never go back and neither would his father.  Let me just make one additional comment, because I think we passed over it with our focus on taxes, which I am focused on. But this pornography thing -- my friends, it is a problem, it's a problem over the Internet, it's a problem in our schools and libraries.  We are wiring every school and library in America to the Internet at taxpayers' expense. It's a great and wonderful thing. We should have every school and library in America acquire filtering software and use that software to filter out a lot of this garbage that is having such a terrible effect on our young children, and that should be done according to community standards. The same way a library board filters out offensive printed material, they should filter out this offensive material.  There are too many cases of children watching pornography and acting in a way which is shameful to all of us. This is a very important issue and deserves more discussion on the part not only of us, but every family, including my own.  I would do anything that I could in my power to stop this terrible affliction that is taking place in Africa today. They are wiping out generations of young Africans. They deserve the same opportunity we do.  If I had confidence that that money would be well spent, I would do it. But we have corrupt governments. We have organizations that don't treat the people. We have places where that medicine can't get to. So before I spent our taxpayers' money on that, I would have to make sure that it would go to the recipients and go to these poor people who are afflicted with this terrible disease. And very frankly, in a lot of parts of Africa today, I do not have that confidence.  Well, I wish this had not come into the political arena. I wish that clearly Vice President Gore and Bradley are pandering to some element here. This is a very difficult issue. We're asking our military commanders to handle this issue. The policy is working. Ask the men and women who work in the military, they will tell you that.  The policy of "don't ask, don't tell" is working. I rely on people like General Colin Powell, people I served with all my adult life, who tell me that this policy is working. Now, we can applaud and yell and scream, but right now our military is in bad shape. We're not meeting our recruiting goals. We're not keeping the men and women we need, and right now I'd like to -- instead of focusing on this issue, I'd like to talk about pay, benefits, 12,000 enlisted people on food stamps, inability to carry out our duties and responsibilities throughout America.  Today -- today on the front page of "The Washington Post," front page of "USA Today" was a study of 25,000 enlisted people in the military.  I suggest you read it, Alan. It gives the primary reasons why people are having so much difficulty in the military today.  Sure. Absolutely.  I -- I might be.  Thanks for the choice.  Orrin, we passed a bill in 1996 called the Telecommunications Reform Act.  I cite it a lot when I see the need -- talk about the need for campaign finance reform. Every special interest played. According to the Consumers Union, they'll tell you that every telecommunications cost has gone up, whether it be cable rates, or long distance rates, or local phone rates. And because they couldn't compete, because everybody at the table -- the big givers, the hundreds of thousands of dollars -- the consumer was left out.  And one of the aspects of this, of course, that we've seen is this continued consolidations and mergers within the telecommunications industry, of a size that we've seldom seen, the latest of which of course we heard announced today: America Online with Time Warner -- two giants, two giants.  Now, your and my jurisdiction overlap, and yours is to take a look at these mergers and consolidations. I don't know if it's right or wrong, but I know that if we let the special interests play, and the American people no longer have a voice, we'll see more and more of these mergers and consolidations. We'll see more and more increases in the cost of telecommunications to the average citizens. Your cable rates have gone up 28 percent since we passed that bill.  What's your view of this latest merger?  The 1906 Act.  I guess I owe you for that kind quesiton. [<i>laughter</i>] [<i>crosstalk</i>]  I thank you. It's an important -- it's an important issue.  It's an important issue.  Yes. Sure. It's...  It's a -- it's a very important issue. I come from the most beautiful state in America, in my view. And the fact is...  The fact is...  The fact is...  Don't count that on my time. [<i>laughter</i>] <b> </b>It's not his job.  The -- In the 1980s, Morris Udall -- a liberal Democrat and one of the loveliest of men -- and I and others worked to put three and a half million acres of pristine wilderness of Arizona in permanent preservation status. It took us several years to do it. We did it through hearings, through meetings, through informal and formal meetings, working with the Native Americans, those who live on the land.  And after three years, we were able to put three and a half million acres of that land into permanent preservation status. We're proud of that. It'll always be there, as it was when Theodore Roosevelt and the first pioneers saw it.  Now this administration, with an Arizonan as secretary of the interior, has just be fiat -- without consulting anyone -- not a single person who lives in Arizona was consulted on this decision. And that decision reaches as far away as New Hampshire -- I don't why I mention New Hampshire -- and -- and other places in America.  The way you get these things done is consultation with the people who live and work there, who love it more than any bureaucrat that lives in Washington, D.C.  I thank you for that question, George.  I'd like to shake hands right now. We will not run negative ads [<i>inaudible</i>] [<i>applause</i>]  Taxes.  I think the character of the president of the United States has an impact on the lives of Americans because the important job of the president of the United States is to lead. And the people of this country have to have confidence in that leadership.  The job of president of the United States, as I see it, is to inspire young Americans to commit themselves to causes greater than their self-interest. And I am convinced that the American people seek someone who doesn't spin, who tells them the truth, whether it happens to be what they'd like to hear or what they want to hear and in many occasions what they don't want to hear. And I think the American people all over this country want somebody that they can trust in that fashion.  I want to thank you, Tim, and our other media people, and all of you. This has been a very, I think, helpful debate tonight, in this process.  I'm running for president of the United States because I want to reform government. I want to reform the military. I want to reform education, and get it out of the hands of the labor bosses. I want to reform the tax code, which is 44,000 pages long, which is nightmare for average citizens because of the influence of the special interests that carve out a good deal or a loophole.  I want to reform the way that we finance campaigns, because young Americans are no longer participating in the political process because they're no longer represented.  The scandal in Washington, besides Monica Lewinsky, was the debasement of every institution of government by the Clinton/Gore campaign in 1996. The president of the United States took the Lincoln Bedroom, treated it like Motel 6, and he was the bellhop.  And my friends, I want to make that illegal so it never happens again, and I want my colleagues to make it illegal as well.  Once I do that then I'll have the ability to inspire young Americans to commit themselves to causes greater than their self interest.  That's what the great presidents in history have been able to do, and that's what young American's need today. I thank you.  Along with those, perhaps Einstein's Theory of Relativity, perhaps.  China is obviously a place where this -- one of the signal failures of this administration. Although there are certainly many failures throughout the world. But I would also look very -- revise our policies concerning these rogue states: Iraq, Libya, North Korea - those countries that continue to try to acquire weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. As long... I'd institute a policy that I call "rogue state rollback." I would arm, train, equip, both from without and from within, forces that would eventually overthrow the governments and install free and democratically elected governments. As long as Saddam Hussein is in power, I am convinced that he will pose a threat to our security. "The New York Times" reported just a few days ago that administration officials worry that Saddam Hussein continues to develop weapons of mass destruction. Congress passed a law a couple of years ago, called the Iraqi Liberation Act; the administration has done nothing. We should help them with arms, training, equipment, radio and a broad variety of ways. Until those governments are overthrown, they will pose a threat to U.S. national security. I'm not sure that would be necessary. It might be an interesting experience, because I know what's going on in Russia. So do an a whole lot of my friends. But the fact is -- well, we know that he was an apparatchik. We know that he was a member of the KGB. We know that he came to power because of the military brutality and massacre that's been taking place in Russia today -- I mean in Chechnya today. We know that he worked a deal with Yeltsin, so that Yeltsin would have immunity, and he would be assured of the presidency, rather than basically a contested -- I'm very concerned about Mr. Putin. I'm afraid Mr. Putin might be one of those who wants to make the trains run on time. So, yes, I would meet with him as a candidate, but I think that what I would really like to do is send a message to Mr. Putin, that we expect certain behavior out of the Russians, and particularly what's going in Chechnya today, a cessation of that brutality. And that is a very important strategic part of the world for us. That's not encouraging when he cut a deal with the communists rather than the reformers in order to consolidate his power. <b>Keyes:</b> I think we're also going to have to be clearer certainly that the Clinton administration has been, that a good relationship with the United States is conditioned on this kind of respect for basic human rights and the requirements of the people. We shouldn't be transferring capital and doing all kinds of things that send a message of business as usual to a regime that hasn't yet shown itself willing to show respect for these basics. I'm concerned. A guy who's name was Adolf Schicklgruber was born there, was a corporal in the German army in World War I, and obviously caused us great problems. But this was a free and fair election, Larry. This was a free and fair election by a sophisticated electorate. I was going to say, there's -- your interpretation of history. But the point is that this was a free and fair election. We have to watch it, we have to pay close attention to what's happening in the middle of Europe in what is viewed by most people as one of the most sophisticated countries in Europe. Obviously we need to keep an eye on it. But I don't think the United States of America right now is prepared to overturn a free and fair election. And I'll tell you what: When the European Union started weighing in, they got a negative reaction from the Austrian people and gained more support for this guy than he otherwise would have had. I just want to say, it's not that simple. It's not that simple because we are driven by Wilsonian principles as well as others. There are times when our principles and our values are so offended that we have to do what we can to resolve a terrible situation. If Rwanda again became a scene of horrible genocide, if there was a way that the United States could stop that and beneficially affect the situation -- by the way, we couldn't in Haiti. We spent -- sent 20,000 troops and spent $2 billion. Haiti is arguably worse off. Obviously, it's the last resort. But we can never say that a nation driven by Judeo-Christian principles will only intervene where our interests are threatened because we also have values. And those values are very important... You know, I'm not interrupting you, Alan. So I think that it's important that we always have some complex challenges as to where we must intervene. Because sometimes we find that if genocide is allowed, the consequences of inaction later on in history are far more severe. Obviously we have too much deployment. We should have our troops coming home from Bosnia. We shouldn't have gone into Kosovo -- or shouldn't have stumbled into Kosovo. There was no need to intervene there. But look, there's only one superpower, and that's the United States of America. And there will be times when the superpower has to do things that other nations don't have to do. And I am convinced that the best way to prevent the loss of blood certainly -- certainly the lessons of the last century showed us is that there may be times when we have to come in early so that we will prevent a recurrence of what happened with the rise of Nazi Germany... ... which is a classic example of that. Well, let me tell you what happened. There was an ad run against me, we ran a counter-ad in New Hampshire, Governor Bush took the ad down. And then I was beat up very badly by all of his surrogates, called Clinton, called Clinton-lite, called every -- a hypocrite. I mean, you've seen... No, here in South Carolina. You've seen it -- turn on the radio, turn on the television, and unfortunately now pick up the telephone and you'll hear a negative attack against John McCain. But let me tell you what really went over the line. Governor Bush had an event, and he paid of it, and standing -- and stood next to a spokesman for a fringe veterans' group. That fringe veteran said that John McCain had abandoned the veterans. Now, I don't know if you can understand this, George, but that really hurts, that really hurts. And so five United States senators, Vietnam veterans, heroes, some of them really incredible heroes, wrote George a letter and said, Apologize, you should be ashamed... You should be ashamed. Now if you want... Well, this same man -- he stood next to him, it was his event. This same man had attacked his father viciously. So I'd be glad to tell you the rest of the story, if you'd let me, when it's appropriate. You should be ashamed -- you should be ashamed of sponsoring an event with that man there whop had attacked your own father. He was at your event. He's listed as your [<i>inaudible</i>] George, he's entitled to his opinion on that issue. You paid for an event... You paid for your... You paid for an event... You paid for an event and stood next to a person. And when you were asked if you would repudiate him, you said, no. So, let me tell you what happened -- let me tell you what happened after that effectively. Let me just finish up, OK? [<i>laughter</i>] So, so... ... so here's what happened. We ran an ad that was a response ad. At a town hall meeting a mother stood up and she said, "Senator McCain, my son was 13 last year. We had a lot of trouble of explaining things to him that went on in Washington." She said, "Now he's 14. He's told me not long ago, 'John McCain is my hero.' He's the man I want to be like. "Well, last night he came into her room," she said, "and he had tears in his eyes because he had answered the phone and the phone call, even though he told the caller that he was 14, said, 'Do you know that John McCain is a liar, and a thief and cheat?'" Well, that night I called my people together. I said, Take down our response ad. We're running nothing but a positive campaign from now on. I committed to that, I promise that. I hope George... Let me just say...[<i>crosstalk</i>] [<i>applause</i>] I don't know who was responsible for it. But I know that the attacks go on. I know that the attacks go on. I told you I pulled them all down. Yes, I did. Yes, I... That is not by my campaign. It is not by my campaign.  That's not -- that is not by my campaign. I pulled them off. But you're putting out stuff that is unbelievable, George, and it's got to stop. And your ads have got to stop. My ads have all stopped. We've pulled all ours down. There's nothing negative on the air and we have insisted that there not be a mean point. The phone calls... His phone calls... I think... I did not abandon the veterans. You should have...[<i>crosstalk</i>] You should have repudiated your guy... It's ended. Of course not, because there's a $1 billion... Yes, there's a $1 billion loophole in it. And it's called individual contributions. Mr. Bernard Schwartz, who is the head of Loral Corporation, gave $1 million individually to the Clinton-Gore campaign in 1996. A series of events then took place. The transfer of technology to China that allowed them to improve the tech -- their missile accuracy. Under his plan, Mr. Schwartz could walk down there and give that $1 million check tomorrow. And that's the reason why this is... Yes, you -- he can give... He can give $1,000 to the RNC, the DNC or anybody else. [<i>crosstalk</i>] That's what it's all about. That's what it's all about.  Sure. Ask any -- ask any... ... ask any ex-senator, Larry. Ask any ex-senator, they'll tell you, they'll tell you. [<i>laughter</i>] Arizona. All right, thank you. I don't think I'm allowed in Texas. [<i>laughter</i>] Well, it's fair to say that I did not win, again this year, Miss Congeniality in the United States Senate. So I have to admit that to you. [<i>laughter</i>] No, because I've taken on the iron triangle -- special interests, money, and legislation -- which we've been grid locked by in Washington, D.C. We've taken government away from the people. And young people are being turned off in droves. And the fact is that I've been involved in lobbying gift -- lobbying ban, gift ban, line-item veto. I've attacked pork-barrel spending and wasteful spending, which is now worse than it's ever been. In fact, George said that he would have -- he supported and would have signed a bill, Citizens Against Government Waste -- it was the worst, most wasteful spending bill in history. And I fought against it. And I didn't make a lot of friends, because I point out these pork-barrel spendings, these wasteful spendings. And I'll fight for reform until the last breath I draw so that we can get the American people back connected with their government. I'm trying to change this party to bring it into the 21st century as a reform party in the tradition of Theodore Roosevelt. I've had 234 major pieces of legislation and amendments passed when I've been in the United States Senate and Congress. One of the most successful records, whether it be in the area of reform, whether it be in the important issues of telecommunications, such as it be Y2K product liability, whether it be Internet tax moratorium, or whether it be in every major foreign policy issue that has confronted this country. My credentials are well know. But I'll tell you what, the Republican Party has lost its way. They have selected an establishment candidate. I don't blame them for doing that. But they lost the last two presidential elections. They lost the last two congressional elections. And unless we open up this party, unless we do what I did in New Hampshire, and that's get thousands and thousands of young people out to register to vote Republican, unless we get independents, reconstitute the old Reagan Democrats -- I'm being criticized now because Democrats may like me. I want to reconstitute that governing coalition. I can do it. I can lead and I have had experience in a lot of ways that will... Could I make a quick comment? Look, the job that I want to take is to inspire a generation of young Americans to commit themselves to causes greater than their self-interest; that's what the great presidents in history have been able to do. On election day in New Hampshire, thousands of young people went out, registered Republican and voted and voted for me. Cindy and I got on a plane, arrived at the airport in Greenville at 3:00 a.m. There were 800 college students out there. Now, I'll admit there was not a mosh pit, but there was certainly an enthusiastic group of young Americans out there. And that's the enthusiasm we're generating and that's what inspirational leadership is all about and I can do that. You know, that's quite a commentary on those young people. Well, Alan, I've been taking a few risks in my life and I'm proud of those risks. Some of them are proudest points of my life. Look, I was not invited to attend Bob Jones. I understand that it's a fine academic school. If I had been invited I would have gone and I would have started by saying, as I have gone to other places that people are not in favor of me, and I would have said, Look, what you're doing in this ban on interracial dating is stupid, it's idiotic and it is incredibly cruel to many people. I also happen to have an adoptive daughter who's from Bangladesh, and I don't think that she should be subjected to those kinds of things. In fact, I will stand up and fight against those. And so, look... If I'd have been -- if I'd have been invited, of course, because you've got to bring the message to get these people up into the modern times. I have no -- no knowledge that they have made a commitment to my campaign. It doesn't mean... Before we leave that issue, can I say -- look, I met with the Log Cabin Republicans. I think Republicans and presidents should meet with every group. We should meet with every group of people. They don't have to agree or disagree. And to say somehow that some people are excluded from our party who identify themselves as Republicans -- I disagree with the Log Cabin Republicans on gay marriages, on the "don't ask/don't tell," on a broad variety of issues. But I agree with them on a stronger defense, lower taxes, less regulation. So we're in agreement on some issues. And I, as president of the United States, and I as the nominee of my party, will meet with -- and not necessarily agree with, everyone in the Republican Party. I'm sure that all that is true. ... but the fact is -- but the fact is that those gays were people, as is today in the military, "don't-ask, don't-tell" situation. I strongly support that policy. I think that George does as well. When you have people like General Colin Powell, General Norman Schwarzkopf, our most respected military leaders who tell us that that's the policy that works, that that's the best way we can have the finest army in the world -- which we don't for other reasons -- then I have to support a policy that the most respected people in America would support. I don't mind being criticized by Alan Keyes. It's getting to be a regular kind of routine in these debates. But I really do question his comments about our military leaders. General Colin Powell is one the finest men I've ever known in my life. And to somehow infer that General Colin Powell was coerced, or forced to adopt a policy that he didn't believe in is a great disservice to one of the greatest men in the history of this country. Sure. That's one thing I'm sure we'll agree on. Oh, he'd be marvelous. There's a few outstanding men I've had the chance to know in my life. He can serve anywhere he wants to in my administration.  Anywhere he wants. He's the 800-pound gorilla. No. George, do you believe in the exemption in abortion, case of abortion, for rape, incest and life of the mother? Then, you know, it's interesting, you were talking about printed material that's mailed out. Here's one that says that George W. Bush supports the pro-life plank. The pro-life plank... Yes. So in other words... ... your position is that you believe there's an exemption for rape, incest and the life of the mother, but you want the platform that you're supposed to be leading to have no exemption. Help me out there, will you? Thank you. It doesn't have... ... the exemptions in it. And you know that very well. If you read... ... the platform, it has no exceptions. Then, you were... ... contradictory... ... you were contradictory in...  I told you this once before, Alan, and I'm sorry I have to tell you again; I've seen enough killing in my life, a lot more than you have. I know -- I know how valuable and precious human life is, and I will not listen to your lectures about how I should treat this very important issue of the sanctity of human life. So, I hope you'll give me the respect that I give you and do not bring, please, my daughter into it. It's a family decision. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. Hold it. Thank you very much. Let's leave my daughter out of it please. We have two surpluses, one that goes into the Social Security trust fund. There's $2 trillion there. If George Bush or Alan Keyes, or Donald Duck were president of the United States, there would be $2 trillion in there because that's the payroll tax that people pay. Then we have the other non-Social Security surplus. I want a balanced approach. A working families tax cut -- Governor Bush has 38 percent of his tax cut go to the wealthiest one percent of Americans -- pay down the debt, Social Security and Medicare. If we're going to save Social Security, we've got to take a bunch of the non-Social Security surplus, pump it into the Social Security system, because we all know that it's going broke. If we do that, then people can then invest part of their own payroll taxes in investments of their choice. The difference between Governor Bush's proposal and mine, is that I put a whole lot of money into Social Security, Medicare and paying down the debt. He puts a whole lot of money into tax cuts. And that's the difference. Because we'd lay this obligation on another generation of young Americans -- $3.6 trillion. At town hall meeting after town hall meeting, I have average Americans stand up to me and say to me, Senator McCain, all these years of running deficits, we've accumulated this debt. We're paying more interest -- as much interest, almost, on it as we are in spending on national defense. We ought to pay down that debt, and not saddle the next generation of young Americans with it. Look... Look, Alan Greenspan just recently said we shouldn't have these massive tax cuts like Governor Bush is proposing. We should pay down the debt. But working families need the tax cut. What Alan Greenspan said, is if it's possible to discipline Congress to pay down the debt, that's fine. But short of being able to discipline Congress -- which I don't think we can do -- that we ought to have a tax cut. That's exactly what Alan Greenspan said. Now my plan is this. There is a $4 trillion projected surplus. $2 trillion of it goes, as John mentioned, to Social Security -- which by the way, pays down debt in the Social Security system. We retire $2 trillion of debt. I spent about have of that -- the remaining -- on tax cuts, and half of it as a cushion, perhaps more debt repayment, perhaps emergency spending. The difference between our plans is, I know who's money it is we're dealing with. We're dealing with the government -- we're dealing with the people's money, not the government's money. And I want to give people their money back. And if you're going to have a tax cut, everybody ought to have a tax cut. This kind of Washington, D.C., view about targeted tax cuts is tax cuts driven by polls and focus groups. If you pay taxes in America, you ought to get a tax cut. Under my plan, if you're a family of four in South Carolina, making $50,000, you get 50-percent tax cut. I've reduced the lower rate from 15 percent to 10 percent, which does this -- and this is important. There are people on the outskirts of poverty, like single moms who are working the toughest job in America. If she has two kids, and making $22,000, for every additional dollar she earns, she pays a higher marginal rate on her taxes than someone making $200,000. You bet I cut the taxes at the top. That encourages entrepreneurship. What we Republicans should stand for is growth in the economy. We ought to make the pie higher. It's $50,000. See, that's what he took offense of when I talked about Bill Clinton. But let me just make one comment. It's not -- it's not the Washington mentality, it's the grown-up mentality. It's the grown-up mentality that recognizes that we have obligations and we've got to pay them off. Again -- again, George says that if it come in Washington, Congress might do something about it -- assume it might spend it. Assuming that the president of the United States is a hapless bystander. Right now Bill Clinton is forcing the Congress of the United States, with threats of veto and shutdown of the government, to spend more money. I, as president of the United States, will force with vetoes and threats of shutdown, the government to pay less. And I believe that's what a president can do... And I -- if they override my veto, I'll make them famous. Because I can stop it. I won't be a hapless bystander. I won't say Congress will just spend the money. How surprising. Oh, I think that the new technology of DNA would, I think, provoke a review, clearly, of cases that may be questionable, but I certainly wouldn't abandon the death penalty. But if there is evidence that maybe there is some controversy where a DNA, with this new technology, could help authenticate the fact that the person was guilty of the crime committed, there's nothing wrong with that. But I think it's important that we recognize that the death penalty is an appropriate punishment for some crimes. Of course, of course, but let me point out now that we had some people come across our -- or try to come across our border -- that were terrorists. If you can specifically identify a suspect, and have the drawing that -- the description then clearly, you will want to stop people that fit that description. But you don't stop -- you don't stop everybody just for any reason. But let's be clear. The security of our borders was nearly violated a short time ago, and we have to be far more vigilant than we've been in the past. George is right. Some bad things have happened. They should be stopped. Because we all...[<i>laughter</i>]...we don't like to go around portraying ourselves as liberals. [<i>laughter</i>] That's number one. I believe that... Please call me Senator. [<i>laughter</i>] Or Your Highness. Look, George Bush is a good man. Alan Keyes is a good man. We have some differences of opinion. This campaign spiraled down. I want the negativism out of it. The people of South Carolina deserve better than what they're getting, and we want to lift up America, and not tear down people. But let me just say, I'm a proud conservative. I believe that my two opponents are proud conservatives. But what this is really all about is articulation of a vision for the future of this country and how we'll lead it. No one knows what challenges we face, both foreign and domestic, as we go into the next century. And I think this campaign is all about vision. Well, I've been labeled everything except -- I think they missed fascist. [<i>laughter</i>] But this is -- listen, ask observers, this is probably the nastiest campaign that people have seen in a long time. But look, I'm enjoying it. This is a great and exhilarating experience. I'm Luke Skywalker getting out of the Death Star. I'm having a lot of fun this campaign. And I'm enjoying it very, very much. You remember who made the first ad that said I was going to raise taxes by $40 billion, George. I explain it because we are in such incredibly prosperous economic times. But there are also polls that show, for example, 54 percent of the American people are suffering from, quote, "Clinton fatigue." And as fast and as far as the vice president wants to run away from him, there's an old saying that you might remember about Joe Louis said about Billy Cohn, and this is true about Al Gore: He can run, but he can't hide. Jefferson, perhaps. [<i>laughter</i>]  Immediately. And that'll make the peace process much simpler. Sure. Because as soon as the Palestinians and others know exactly where that capital is, then it'll be off the table. I give Senator George Mitchell and the Clinton administration credit for a fine job in Northern Ireland. Not any place else in the world that I can think of. But sure we should. And again, I want to point out that being made world's number one superpower has great luxuries, it also has great responsibilities and we have to understand those. As president of the United States, on a foreign policy issue, I will never take a poll. If in June of 1950, when North Korea attacked South Korea, if Harry Truman had taken a poll, we'd have never gone; that was an important chapter in our winning the Cold War. I will never take a poll. In the most obscene chapter in recent American history is the conduct of the Kosovo conflict when the president of the United States refused to prepare for ground operations, refused to have air power used effectively because he wanted them flying -- he had them flying at 15,000 feet where they killed innocent civilians because they were dropping bombs from such -- in high altitude. No, I will never, ever take a poll on a matter of national security. No, because we need to continue the triad. Before we break one of those legs, we'd better be pretty sure that they're not necessary. But we do need to pursue weapons -- we do need to pursue ballistic defense systems. And I want to say, I'm going to call some admirals and generals over, and some civilian secretaries over to the White House, and knock some heads together. We need more progress on this missile defense system. As president of the United States, I will veto any bill that crosses my desk that reinstitutes the sales tax. We've got to make it permanent so these people that are making huge and massive investments in the Internet will have the confidence that it won't be taxed. Look we can't choke this baby in the cradle. I don't care about these governors. We're talking about the engine of America's...[<i>laughter</i>]...economy. And they ought to understand that. They're running surpluses. They ought to get their greedy hands off it so that American economy can grow and develop as it should... No state tax... We've learned enough... Every American should have access to health insurance. But we've got a big problem in America right now, and that's seniors who can't afford prescription drugs. And we've got to address that right now. And if it requires a government program, then I'll support a government program to do that. We're going to do just fine. I think, we're going to do just fine. I think we're probably going to win. I think it's going to be close. But really, you know, when you talk about reform, the key to reform is getting the government out of the hands of the special interests. And you've got to have a real campaign finance reform plan, not one that leaves a $1 billion loophole. I want to thank the people of South Carolina for their wonderful and warm reception, and friendships that we have made here -- the town hall meetings, the trips all around the state have been truly marvelous. I want to reform the government, obviously. I want to reform education, the military, health care. I can't do that unless we get the government out of the hands of the special interests. Some have come lately to the reform agenda. I've been there for years, and I've been fighting it and we'll win as we've won on other reform issues. But most of all, I'd like to end up by recounting a story that happened at my 100th town hall meeting in New Hampshire. A lady stood up and she looked me in the eye and she didn't have a question. She said, Senator McCain, it's vitally important to me that the next president of the United States always tell me the truth. I promise you as president of the United States, based on my life, my principles and the caution of my old dear friends, I will always tell you the truth, no matter what. Thank you, Rennie. Thank you to the Des Moines Register for hosting this very important debate here. It's wonderful to be back. This is the state where my father was born, in Council Bluffs.  A lot of you don't know me. I want to assure you that I'm running for president of the United States because I want to reform the institutions of government. I want to reform education and the military and health care and the tax code. We can't do that unless we get the government out of the hands of the special interests and back into the public interests.  Now, I know that nine days, nine evenings from tonight, we're going to have a big event. And I hope there will be a very hearty band of Americans, Iowans who will go out and say, Hey, this guy McCain, he's qualified and prepared to be president of the United States.  And I can assure you that I am.  All of the proposals that my colleagues have mentioned are all good, including tax deductions for those who itemize, as well as those who don't -- medical savings accounts, et cetera. But I want to talk about a special group of Americans that may not be able to do all these things, and that's our World War II veterans, our greatest generation.  Thanks to Tom Brokaw's book, "The Greatest Generation," thanks to the movie "Saving Private Ryan," Americans are beginning to appreciate the service and sacrifice of these brave Americans who did make the world safe for democracy.  Their leaving us at 30,000 a month. We promised them -- we promised them -- health care and benefits when we asked them to go out and serve and sacrifice. We're not doing that, my friends. They deserve the health care benefits that we promise them.  And I -- as I'm on this book tour for the book I wrote, and I see these World War II veterans, they deserve far better from they're getting. And this administration is AWOL on this issue.  All of us in this room in the next 15 minutes, including with Congressman Ganske here, could sit down and work out a patients' bill of rights. We all know, it's simple: allow a women to see a gynecologist, a second opinion, emergency room care, the right to sue under certain circumstances. Why don't we? Why is it hung up in Congress.  Because the Democrats are id locked by the trial lawyers, who want everybody to sue everybody for everything. And the Republicans are grid locked by the big money from the HMOs and the insurance companies.  The American people deserve better. And until we get this soft money, these uncontrolled contributions out of Washington... ... we won't reach agreements.  Vaminos. [<i>laughter</i>]  Arriba. [<i>laughter</i>]  Gary, I want to roll out the red carpet for you again, if I could. [<i>laughter</i>]  You know the scandals of 1996 were the debasement of every institution of government by the Clinton-Gore campaign, and their abuses were incredible.  Perhaps the most compelling and concerning was the money that came from China. And we'll never know how much. We'll never know about how much technology was transferred. But I'd like your views on that. And how in the world anybody could defend the present system where that kind of thing went on, if we don't change that status quo.  And I had a bill on the floor of the Senate to ban this exact corrupt practice. And it was not even allowed to be voted on. What does that tell you about the influence of this special interest money in the Congress of the United States of America?  Well, the first thing I'd say to the single mom is that I've got a tax cut for you and Governor Bush doesn't. That's the first thing.  Yes, it is.  But let's talk about the real -- the real issue here. The real issue is, my friends, is we've got a surplus. And, for the first time since Dwight David Eisenhower we've got a surplus. And the question is what do you want to do with it?  I want to give it to low-and middle-income Americans as a tax cut. I want to give them the benefits from this that they need that lower and middle-income Americans need.  But I also think we've got a ticking time bomb out there called Social Security. That has got to be fixed. We've got a national debt of $5.6 trillion that we need to pay for -- because we're laying that debt on young Americans. We need to pay down that debt.  Governor Bush's plan has not one penny for Social Security, not one penny for Medicare, and not one penny for paying down the national debt.  And when you run ads saying you're going to take care of Social Security, my friend, that's all hat and no cattle.  You know, they're always cutest when they're true. [<i>laughter</i>]  That certainly is.  I thought that's what we were talking about.  I'm giving them a huge tax cut. And that is a fact.  And the reality is, that your tax plan has 36 percent of it going to the richest 1 percent in America. I don't do that. I think that we ought to give the tax relief to the people that need it the most.  But I also think the best thing I can do for that woman you're talking about is save her Social Security.  $2 trillion isn't the Social Security trust fund. You know that. Let's not do the Texas two-step here. It needs $5 to $7 trillion more, and we've got to do it soon, so that they can invest their retirement into savings investments of their choice, so we can save the system.  I think that what's happening is very sad. We're seeing a greater consolidation of the agri-businesses. For example, a majority of the ethanol subsidies goes to Archer Daniels Midland, which is over in Illinois, as I understand it. Obviously we need crop insurance. We need to examine why it is that the government takes almost everything that a family earns all of his life and can't pass it on to their children. I think that making the inheritance tax kick in only at a level of about $5 million would have enormous beneficial effect on that.  Also, I'm the greatest free trader you will know. I will lower barriers to product goods and products from other countries, if they will lower their barriers to ours.  And the most productive farmer in the world in the American farmer and the Iowa farmer. The people in Beijing and Bangkok and Paris will be eating Iowa pork and they will love it, because I will get those products into their markets.  Orrin, everyone of those gallons can help neither the consumer nor the environment. And there's study, after study, after study that indicates that. Ethanol was a program that came in during the gas crisis in the 1970s. And like most government programs, it lived on forever.  I want the farmer not to be dependent upon government subsidies. I want them to be independent. And I think the best way we can do that is give them the maximum flexibility that they can, and get their products -- one third of the output of the farms -- agricultural output in America is exported. And that's where we ought to focus most of our attention.  If everybody else pays, it is.  The first and primary responsibility of the President of the United States is to protect its security and conduct foreign policy.  This administration has conducted foreign policy in a feckless, photo-op way that will cause us perhaps to have to expend our most precious assets: our American blood and treasure.  I will not take a poll as president of the United States as to how to conduct foreign policy. The recent crisis in Kosovo that we stumbled into without having to get into was conducted by polls, where the president refused to mass -- to prepare for ground operations so Mr. Milosevic was able to more efficiently murder, rape and kill innocent civilians.  We dropped bombs from 15,000 feet, thereby killing innocent civilians. This conduct of foreign policy has got to be changed, and the leadership of this nation has got to rest in the hands of someone who understands it, is prepared for it. And I am fully prepared.  Choice and competition are the key to the future of the education in America. And if we don't keep that decisionmaking process at the state and local level then we'll just see a repetition of what we've seen in the past, which is a very unfortunate situation. Students in America rank at the bottom in the most important disciplines, such as physics, science and chemistry.  I believe that we should try charter schools all over America. In my state of Arizona, they are very popular.  I would take the gas and oil, ethanol and sugar subsidies and take that money and put it into a test voucher program over three years to be used in every poor school district in every state in America.  Governor Bush has a similar program. It's -- I've forgotten the name of it. It's French for vouchers. But we -- his takes the money out of existing education. I want to take the money out of the gas and oil and sugar and ethanol subsidies and other programs that don't benefit the taxpayer.  Choice and competition, that's the answer. And I think that we will be well served to use those as our principles.  It's not fair and that's why it's an integral part of the program that I have. In fact, not only does my proposal take care of the working mom, but also the nonworking mom.  But again, the crux of this issue is, do we want to give middle income and lower income Americans a much-needed tax break and also take care of the other obligations that we have made over the years?  We are staggering under a $5.6 trillion national debt. My friends, we can't lay that burden on future generations of Americans.  The Social Security trust fund is a ticking time bomb. We all know that at 2014 more money will be going out that coming in.  I want to take this surplus, put it into -- 62 percent of it into Social Security, help Medicare, pay down the debt, and give Americans a tax break. And part of that will be paid for by eliminating a lot of this corporate welfare and wasteful spending.  I think that if we bank on these surpluses -- George, three years ago people were saying there are going to be surpluses as far as -- deficits as far as we can see. Now they're saying they will have surpluses as far as the eye can see. I'm not so sure.  George, you say that the money, if it remains in Washington, Congress will spend it. The president of the United States is not a hapless bystander. Just last fall, just last fall in November Congress passed one of the most obscene pieces of work that I've seen -- a pork-laden bill that spent the entire $14 billion surplus. I fought against that bill. I voted against it. I railed against it. You said you supported it, and would have signed it. The president of the United States can force the Congress of the United States to spend less money. And if they won't, he can make them famous.  You know it's interesting that we begin our proceedings every day in the United States Senate with a prayer. Now, it doesn't have the beneficial effect that some desire, but it seems to be...[<i>laughter</i>]... but it seems to be acceptable for the United States Senate to do that.  Earlier last year, I had the opportunity to go with Bill Bennett to a charter school in Phoenix, Arizona. Low income children there. Some of them didn't speak Spanish when they first got there.  We walked into the third grade classroom. There on the teacher's desk was the Children's Book of Virtues. The teacher was teaching the virtue of the month -- the importance to tell the truth. She was telling the students why is it important you tell the truth. What happens when you don't? What do your parents think?  I think the virtue of the month as exemplified in the Ten Commandments could be and should be taught in every school in America.  I believe we have to examine all the Internet -- all the environmental laws -- that are on the books today. They're long overdue for reauthorization and reexamination. And that would have to be one of the top priorities of a new administration.  But I want to talk just for a minute. Theodore Roosevelt was my hero and is to this day. He was responsible for the national parks system, the crown jewels of America. They are $6 billion underfunded. They're under enormous strain. We've got to figure out ways to preserve our great national park system. And that must be -- must be a top priority.  I want to thank all of you for being here. I've enjoyed, as usual, these debates. They've been remarkable.  I'm committed to the concept of reform. I want to get the special interests out of Washington and give the government back to you. I want to reform the tax code, the military, education. I can't do that unless we get the money and the special interests out of Washington, D.C.  I want to pay down the debt. I want to save Social Security. I think those are important issues as we go through this campaign. But most of all, I want to inspire a generation of Americans to commit themselves... ... to causes greater than their self-interest.  Thank you, Rennie. Thank you to the Des Moines Register for hosting this very important debate here. It's wonderful to be back. This is the state where my father was born, in Council Bluffs.  A lot of you don't know me. I want to assure you that I'm running for president of the United States because I want to reform the institutions of government. I want to reform education and the military and health care and the tax code. We can't do that unless we get the government out of the hands of the special interests and back into the public interests.  Now, I know that nine days, nine evenings from tonight, we're going to have a big event. And I hope there will be a very hearty band of Americans, Iowans who will go out and say, Hey, this guy McCain, he's qualified and prepared to be president of the United States.  And I can assure you that I am.  All of the proposals that my colleagues have mentioned are all good, including tax deductions for those who itemize, as well as those who don't -- medical savings accounts, et cetera. But I want to talk about a special group of Americans that may not be able to do all these things, and that's our World War II veterans, our greatest generation.  Thanks to Tom Brokaw's book, "The Greatest Generation," thanks to the movie "Saving Private Ryan," Americans are beginning to appreciate the service and sacrifice of these brave Americans who did make the world safe for democracy.  Their leaving us at 30,000 a month. We promised them -- we promised them -- health care and benefits when we asked them to go out and serve and sacrifice. We're not doing that, my friends. They deserve the health care benefits that we promise them.  And I -- as I'm on this book tour for the book I wrote, and I see these World War II veterans, they deserve far better from they're getting. And this administration is AWOL on this issue.  All of us in this room in the next 15 minutes, including with Congressman Ganske here, could sit down and work out a patients' bill of rights. We all know, it's simple: allow a women to see a gynecologist, a second opinion, emergency room care, the right to sue under certain circumstances. Why don't we? Why is it hung up in Congress.  Because the Democrats are id locked by the trial lawyers, who want everybody to sue everybody for everything. And the Republicans are grid locked by the big money from the HMOs and the insurance companies.  The American people deserve better. And until we get this soft money, these uncontrolled contributions out of Washington... ... we won't reach agreements.  Vaminos. [<i>laughter</i>]  Arriba. [<i>laughter</i>]  Gary, I want to roll out the red carpet for you again, if I could. [<i>laughter</i>]  You know the scandals of 1996 were the debasement of every institution of government by the Clinton-Gore campaign, and their abuses were incredible.  Perhaps the most compelling and concerning was the money that came from China. And we'll never know how much. We'll never know about how much technology was transferred. But I'd like your views on that. And how in the world anybody could defend the present system where that kind of thing went on, if we don't change that status quo.  And I had a bill on the floor of the Senate to ban this exact corrupt practice. And it was not even allowed to be voted on. What does that tell you about the influence of this special interest money in the Congress of the United States of America?  Well, the first thing I'd say to the single mom is that I've got a tax cut for you and Governor Bush doesn't. That's the first thing.  Yes, it is.  But let's talk about the real -- the real issue here. The real issue is, my friends, is we've got a surplus. And, for the first time since Dwight David Eisenhower we've got a surplus. And the question is what do you want to do with it?  I want to give it to low-and middle-income Americans as a tax cut. I want to give them the benefits from this that they need that lower and middle-income Americans need.  But I also think we've got a ticking time bomb out there called Social Security. That has got to be fixed. We've got a national debt of $5.6 trillion that we need to pay for -- because we're laying that debt on young Americans. We need to pay down that debt.  Governor Bush's plan has not one penny for Social Security, not one penny for Medicare, and not one penny for paying down the national debt.  And when you run ads saying you're going to take care of Social Security, my friend, that's all hat and no cattle.  You know, they're always cutest when they're true. [<i>laughter</i>]  That certainly is.  I thought that's what we were talking about.  I'm giving them a huge tax cut. And that is a fact.  And the reality is, that your tax plan has 36 percent of it going to the richest 1 percent in America. I don't do that. I think that we ought to give the tax relief to the people that need it the most.  But I also think the best thing I can do for that woman you're talking about is save her Social Security.  $2 trillion isn't the Social Security trust fund. You know that. Let's not do the Texas two-step here. It needs $5 to $7 trillion more, and we've got to do it soon, so that they can invest their retirement into savings investments of their choice, so we can save the system.  I think that what's happening is very sad. We're seeing a greater consolidation of the agri-businesses. For example, a majority of the ethanol subsidies goes to Archer Daniels Midland, which is over in Illinois, as I understand it. Obviously we need crop insurance. We need to examine why it is that the government takes almost everything that a family earns all of his life and can't pass it on to their children. I think that making the inheritance tax kick in only at a level of about $5 million would have enormous beneficial effect on that.  Also, I'm the greatest free trader you will know. I will lower barriers to product goods and products from other countries, if they will lower their barriers to ours.  And the most productive farmer in the world in the American farmer and the Iowa farmer. The people in Beijing and Bangkok and Paris will be eating Iowa pork and they will love it, because I will get those products into their markets.  Orrin, everyone of those gallons can help neither the consumer nor the environment. And there's study, after study, after study that indicates that. Ethanol was a program that came in during the gas crisis in the 1970s. And like most government programs, it lived on forever.  I want the farmer not to be dependent upon government subsidies. I want them to be independent. And I think the best way we can do that is give them the maximum flexibility that they can, and get their products -- one third of the output of the farms -- agricultural output in America is exported. And that's where we ought to focus most of our attention.  If everybody else pays, it is.  The first and primary responsibility of the President of the United States is to protect its security and conduct foreign policy.  This administration has conducted foreign policy in a feckless, photo-op way that will cause us perhaps to have to expend our most precious assets: our American blood and treasure.  I will not take a poll as president of the United States as to how to conduct foreign policy. The recent crisis in Kosovo that we stumbled into without having to get into was conducted by polls, where the president refused to mass -- to prepare for ground operations so Mr. Milosevic was able to more efficiently murder, rape and kill innocent civilians.  We dropped bombs from 15,000 feet, thereby killing innocent civilians. This conduct of foreign policy has got to be changed, and the leadership of this nation has got to rest in the hands of someone who understands it, is prepared for it. And I am fully prepared.  Choice and competition are the key to the future of the education in America. And if we don't keep that decisionmaking process at the state and local level then we'll just see a repetition of what we've seen in the past, which is a very unfortunate situation. Students in America rank at the bottom in the most important disciplines, such as physics, science and chemistry.  I believe that we should try charter schools all over America. In my state of Arizona, they are very popular.  I would take the gas and oil, ethanol and sugar subsidies and take that money and put it into a test voucher program over three years to be used in every poor school district in every state in America.  Governor Bush has a similar program. It's -- I've forgotten the name of it. It's French for vouchers. But we -- his takes the money out of existing education. I want to take the money out of the gas and oil and sugar and ethanol subsidies and other programs that don't benefit the taxpayer.  Choice and competition, that's the answer. And I think that we will be well served to use those as our principles.  It's not fair and that's why it's an integral part of the program that I have. In fact, not only does my proposal take care of the working mom, but also the nonworking mom.  But again, the crux of this issue is, do we want to give middle income and lower income Americans a much-needed tax break and also take care of the other obligations that we have made over the years?  We are staggering under a $5.6 trillion national debt. My friends, we can't lay that burden on future generations of Americans.  The Social Security trust fund is a ticking time bomb. We all know that at 2014 more money will be going out that coming in.  I want to take this surplus, put it into -- 62 percent of it into Social Security, help Medicare, pay down the debt, and give Americans a tax break. And part of that will be paid for by eliminating a lot of this corporate welfare and wasteful spending.  I think that if we bank on these surpluses -- George, three years ago people were saying there are going to be surpluses as far as -- deficits as far as we can see. Now they're saying they will have surpluses as far as the eye can see. I'm not so sure.  George, you say that the money, if it remains in Washington, Congress will spend it. The president of the United States is not a hapless bystander. Just last fall, just last fall in November Congress passed one of the most obscene pieces of work that I've seen -- a pork-laden bill that spent the entire $14 billion surplus. I fought against that bill. I voted against it. I railed against it. You said you supported it, and would have signed it. The president of the United States can force the Congress of the United States to spend less money. And if they won't, he can make them famous.  You know it's interesting that we begin our proceedings every day in the United States Senate with a prayer. Now, it doesn't have the beneficial effect that some desire, but it seems to be...[<i>laughter</i>]... but it seems to be acceptable for the United States Senate to do that.  Earlier last year, I had the opportunity to go with Bill Bennett to a charter school in Phoenix, Arizona. Low income children there. Some of them didn't speak Spanish when they first got there.  We walked into the third grade classroom. There on the teacher's desk was the Children's Book of Virtues. The teacher was teaching the virtue of the month -- the importance to tell the truth. She was telling the students why is it important you tell the truth. What happens when you don't? What do your parents think?  I think the virtue of the month as exemplified in the Ten Commandments could be and should be taught in every school in America.  I believe we have to examine all the Internet -- all the environmental laws -- that are on the books today. They're long overdue for reauthorization and reexamination. And that would have to be one of the top priorities of a new administration.  But I want to talk just for a minute. Theodore Roosevelt was my hero and is to this day. He was responsible for the national parks system, the crown jewels of America. They are $6 billion underfunded. They're under enormous strain. We've got to figure out ways to preserve our great national park system. And that must be -- must be a top priority.  I want to thank all of you for being here. I've enjoyed, as usual, these debates. They've been remarkable.  I'm committed to the concept of reform. I want to get the special interests out of Washington and give the government back to you. I want to reform the tax code, the military, education. I can't do that unless we get the money and the special interests out of Washington, D.C.  I want to pay down the debt. I want to save Social Security. I think those are important issues as we go through this campaign. But most of all, I want to inspire a generation of Americans to commit themselves... ... to causes greater than their self-interest.  It's neither the intention nor the implication of the ad. The ad states clearly what I believe, and that is that I am fully qualified, I am the best prepared to lead this nation in the next century in very dangerous times. Unfortunately, this administration has conducted a feckless, photo-op foreign policy for which we may have to pay a very heavy price in the future in American blood and treasure. I have a coherent, cohesive concept of what I want the world to look like and what the interests and the values are and where the threats lie. I understand the problems of the men and women in the military. I think it's an absolute disgrace that there's 15,000 -- 12,000 proud, brave, young enlisted families that are on food stamps in the military. There will be no food stamp military when I am president of the United States. I am simply stating and will repeat: I am fully prepared to be president of the United States. No, it's not a handicap; it's not at all. But this is the first administration with the president of the United States and the secretary of defense and the secretary of state that have never spent on minute wearing the uniform of the armed services of the United States, and I promise you that won't happen on my watch. I would think so, because then we could eliminate quotas which I think neither helps the beneficiary nor improves the effort to improve equality in America. But I also think that it's very important that we preserve our rich heritage. In my state, Hispanic heritage has made us wonderful and great and noble. And I want to preserve that. I also want to underscore the fact that we still have a lot of people down at the economic -- bottom rung of the economic ladder that need a lot of help and a lot of assistance no matter what their ethnic makeup is. And we have to address this issue. I think -- I think we've pretty well massaged that. I'm proud of my pro-life record in public life. I'm the only one here who has gone to the floor of the Senate and voted in the preservation of the life of the unborn. I have worked very had for the ban of partial birth abortion. I have sought for approval and legislation requiring parental consent and parental notification. I am proud of that pro-life record and I will continue to maintain it. I will not draw my children into this discussion. Because unlike you, I have a 17-year voting record and record of service to this country, including doing everything that I can to preserve the rights of the unborn. I have spoken as eloquently as I can on that issue. I am proud of my record. And that record, I will stand on. And I am completely comfortable of the fact that as the leader of a pro-life party, with a pro-life position, that I will persuade -- which is what really this is all about -- to have young Americans understand the importance of the preservation of the rights of the unborn. Gary...  The United States Supreme Court issued a decision day before yesterday concerning campaign finance reform. It was a marvelous decision. It affirmed everything that I have fought for, including the fact, in the words of one judge, money is property, not free speech. We know the corruption that has taken place in the Clinton and Gore campaign as a result of the 1996 election and the unlimited campaign contributions. We know how important it is now to have an opportunity to enact real, meaningful campaign finance reform. I'd like your views on that very important Supreme Court decision. The Supreme Court said there is little reason to doubt that sometimes large contributions will work actual corruption of our political system and no reason to question the existence of a corresponding suspicion among voters. Do you know that the Republican Party is now taking -- setting up a mechanism for this huge soft money thing. The Democrats are also. We're talking about hundreds of millions of dollars, if not billions, that are going to be washing around in this next presidential campaign usually in the form of negative ads. And don't you think we as candidates ought to say we will have nothing to do with that corruption of our system? I'm the only guy that has a commercial running that morph's Bill Clinton's face into mine. I believe that we do have a problem and that is that there is a growing gap between the haves and the have-nots in America, those that are able to take part in this information technology and those that haven't. We took a major step forward when we decided to wire every school and library in America to the Internet. That's a good program. We have to have step two, three and four, which means good equipment, good teachers and good classrooms. Now, I would do it directly, but there are lots of ways that you can encourage corporations, who in their own self-interest would want to provide -- receive tax benefits, would receive credit, and many other ways for being involved in the schools and upgrading the quality of the equipment that they have, the quality of the students, and thereby providing a much needed, well-trained work force. It was a government program that invented the Internet. I think it was Al Gore. I invented television. Sir. Well, I think maybe President Clinton's looks too much like mine. He looked too much like me when he signed the Welfare Reform Act. He looked too much like me in a number of shifts that he made to the center for political expediency. Look, we all know we've got a ticking time bomb out there, and it's called the Social Security trust fund, Bernie. And starting in 2014 there will be more money going out than in. According to Senator Gregg, Governor Bush's campaign chairman here in New Hampshire, there's a $5 trillion unfunded liability out there in the form of the Social Security trust fund. It has to -- if we can put the money in quick, then we will be able to allow people to invest their payroll taxes into investments of their choosing and make a huge amount of difference in the solvency of their retirement fund. This is a very, very important issue, because in good times -- in good times, not bad times -- when we have a surplus, we should give the middle-income Americans a tax break. They need it. They pay as much as 40 percent of their income in taxes. But at the same time, people in New Hampshire are telling me, Senator McCain, save Social Security, put some money into Medicare, and pay down that debt, and don't put that burden on future generations of Americans. More young Americans believe Elvis is alive than they believe that they'll ever see a social security check. Yes. Sure, which is one trillion. Less than what? Less than projected? That's why I have percentages of the surplus to be put in. Sixty-two percent of the surplus to be put into social security, 23 percent in the tax cuts, 10 percent into Medicare and the remainder into paying down the debt. And I agree with you, these estimates are economists' words for guesses. And I'm not positive that we will continue to have the surpluses as they are presently envisioned. So, therefore, we want to be cautious. I think it's conservative in good times to put money into Social Security; it's conservative to pay down the debt; and it's conservative clearly to try to save Medicare; and at the same time, give these tax breaks to American families, including making that tax flatter up and up and up. I want to lift the 15 percent tax bracket up to couples making $70,000 a year. I think we can do it. I voted to convict the president of the United States on grounds that he lied under oath. In fact, there was a discussion at the time as to whether we expect the same standards of a member of the military as the president of the United States. No, we don't expect the same standards, we expect a higher standards from members -- from the president of the United States than members of the military. The people of this country are suffering from Clinton fatigue, and it's because they want someone who will look them in the eye and tell them the truth. That's the pledge I've made to the people of New Hampshire and the people of this country. George, strangely enough. We all know Washington spends too much money. In fact, last November there was an incredible bill passed full of earmarked pork barrel spending. They spent the then-$14 billion surplus that was going to -- supposed to be there for this year. And you said you supported that bill, and that you sign it as president of the United States. I voted against it, said as president I would veto it, and saw it as one of the most egregious practices. Tell me, what corporate loopholes would you close? And what spending cuts would you make? George, you seem to depict the role of the president as a hapless bystander. This president is threatening to shut down the government and vetoing bills to force the Congress to spend more money. An active president of the United States -- i.e., me -- will veto bills and threaten to shut down the government to make them spend less money. Look, you have been talking about how you want to increase the military. We don't have unlimited funds. Tell me, is there any military programs that you would reduce spending on? And I appreciate new dedication to reducing the debt. I -- your plan... ... and I could have written myself. And I congratulate you. Well, first of all, George, if you're saying that I'm like Al Gore, then you're spinning like Bill Clinton. OK. Let's -- let's clear that one up. Second of all, I believe that we need choice and competition in schools. The problem with yours is you give too much power to the federal bureaucracy in Washington. I want the states to make those decisions. I want to encourage charter schools. I want to have a test voucher program using ethanol, gas and oil subsidies and sugar subsidies so we can start a test program in the poorest school districts in every state in America. You want to use funds from public education. I don't want to take funds from public education, I want to take it from the subsidies that you support. You went to Iowa and supported ethanol subsidies. You went to Florida and support the sugar subsidies. And we know how you feel about oil and gas subsidies. That's why I had the question about which subsidy would you do away with. But the point is that if we have choice and competitions, charter schools, voucher programs, merit pay for teachers based on student performance, then we will give every American parent the choice that they deserve. And that is to send their child to the school of their choice. And that's an important element in any overall education program and proposal. And moms and dads and kids deserve a lot better than what they're getting today. George, as a governor you should understand and I thought you would cherish the rights and authority of the state rather than handing it over to Washington. Your proposal has that decision made by some nameless, faceless bureaucrat in Washington, D.C. They're the ones that tell the states they're not meeting the standards. I want the folks in my state to set the standards and tell them when they're meeting the standards. That's the critical part. No, you have the federal bureaucracy make it. But the overall problem too is that you're asking -- you're asking to -- money to take out of public education for vouchers when they need that money. Let's -- let's kill off that sugar subsidy, let's kill off that ethanol subsidy that helps nobody except perhaps Archer Daniels Midland. And let's take that money and put it into the education of our children. That's where we can really help parents in America. You know, Mr. Keyes, you attacked me earlier on about my position on defending the rights of the unborn. I want to tell you something. I've seen enough killing in my life. I know how precious human life is. And I don't need a lecture from you. The next time, try decaf. I don't know, I love debates. They're all fun. And the more the merrier. It's fine with me. By the way, George, we've had several offers for you and I to debate one on one. I've accepted them. I hope you will... Right. We can include them, and we can exclude them. We can have lots of debates. We've had several that they've just asked you and me to engage in. Look, it's an important part of the political process. I think it's a great chance for people to really get to know the candidates. It's part of this political process. And I enjoy it. And I hope we can have lots of them. Well said. Help me out, George... This court ruling is a magnificent affirmation of the efforts that I and reformers have been making for many years. And you know, Governor Bush says that it's unilateral disarmament if we get the special interests out of Washington. I see it as a clear road to victory. Because when I'm in the debate with Al Gore, I'm going to turn to Al Gore and I'm going to say, You and Bill Clinton debased the institutions of government in 1996 when you were engaged in reprehensible conduct, and then you said there was no controlling legal authority. I'm going to give you a controlling legal authority. And I'm going to make what they did illegal. And, George, when you're in that debate, you're going to stand there and you'll have nothing to say because you're defending this system. You know, you've said that it's bad for our party if we have campaign finance reform. I've always had the belief that's what good for our country is good for our party. Because there's an iron triangle in Washington, D.C., my friends, that have deprived you of your representation. It's big money and lobbyists and legislation that deprive you of your representation. I'm going to break that iron triangle. They're scared to death down in Washington, in the lobbying community, because they know it's not going to be business as usual. And if there's anybody around that wants business as usual, they don't want to vote for John McCain. I'm not proud when the Republican Party is taking $7 million from the tobacco companies. I'm appalled when I hear of these new setups of millions and millions of uncontrolled money that will never be disclosed. We know what happened in '96; Chinese money flowed into the United States of America and our national security was compromised. That's wrong. That's wrong. Until the last breath I draw, I'll give the government back to the American people. You know and I know that labor gives millions of dollars... ... and it would be effective, also. Fine, I'll be glad to. Well, I mean look, we know what happened. We know what's happening. It's now legal in America for a Chinese army-owned corporation, with a subsidiary in the United States of America, to give unlimited amounts of money to an American political campaign. I don't know how you defend that. We know that the labor bosses go down with the big checks. We know the trial lawyers go down with the big checks. We would ban that. Clearly we want paycheck protection, but we really we also know what's going on with some of your people right now. They're setting up soft money to be used in the general -- at least the media reports -- in the general campaign. My friends, we've got to fix this system before it lurches out of control, and young Americans won't take part in the political process. We had the lowest voter turnout in history in the 1998 election. These young people need to be brought back into the political process. I'll do that. This may be the last time I have a chance to talk directly to the people of New Hampshire. My dear friends, thank you for letting Cindy and me be your temporary neighbors. This has been one of the most wonderful and uplifting experiences in my life. I will cherish this memory always. I just had my 103rd town hall meeting in Plymouth Armory, and it, like every other, was an enlightening and wonderful experience for me. I'm grateful. I promise you again, I will always tell the truth. I'll reform the government. And I'll inspire a generation of Americans to commit themselves to causes greater than their self-interest. And I thank you. It's neither the intention nor the implication of the ad. The ad states clearly what I believe, and that is that I am fully qualified, I am the best prepared to lead this nation in the next century in very dangerous times. Unfortunately, this administration has conducted a feckless, photo-op foreign policy for which we may have to pay a very heavy price in the future in American blood and treasure. I have a coherent, cohesive concept of what I want the world to look like and what the interests and the values are and where the threats lie. I understand the problems of the men and women in the military. I think it's an absolute disgrace that there's 15,000 -- 12,000 proud, brave, young enlisted families that are on food stamps in the military. There will be no food stamp military when I am president of the United States. I am simply stating and will repeat: I am fully prepared to be president of the United States. No, it's not a handicap; it's not at all. But this is the first administration with the president of the United States and the secretary of defense and the secretary of state that have never spent on minute wearing the uniform of the armed services of the United States, and I promise you that won't happen on my watch. I would think so, because then we could eliminate quotas which I think neither helps the beneficiary nor improves the effort to improve equality in America. But I also think that it's very important that we preserve our rich heritage. In my state, Hispanic heritage has made us wonderful and great and noble. And I want to preserve that. I also want to underscore the fact that we still have a lot of people down at the economic -- bottom rung of the economic ladder that need a lot of help and a lot of assistance no matter what their ethnic makeup is. And we have to address this issue. I think -- I think we've pretty well massaged that. I'm proud of my pro-life record in public life. I'm the only one here who has gone to the floor of the Senate and voted in the preservation of the life of the unborn. I have worked very had for the ban of partial birth abortion. I have sought for approval and legislation requiring parental consent and parental notification. I am proud of that pro-life record and I will continue to maintain it. I will not draw my children into this discussion. Because unlike you, I have a 17-year voting record and record of service to this country, including doing everything that I can to preserve the rights of the unborn. I have spoken as eloquently as I can on that issue. I am proud of my record. And that record, I will stand on. And I am completely comfortable of the fact that as the leader of a pro-life party, with a pro-life position, that I will persuade -- which is what really this is all about -- to have young Americans understand the importance of the preservation of the rights of the unborn. Gary...  The United States Supreme Court issued a decision day before yesterday concerning campaign finance reform. It was a marvelous decision. It affirmed everything that I have fought for, including the fact, in the words of one judge, money is property, not free speech. We know the corruption that has taken place in the Clinton and Gore campaign as a result of the 1996 election and the unlimited campaign contributions. We know how important it is now to have an opportunity to enact real, meaningful campaign finance reform. I'd like your views on that very important Supreme Court decision. The Supreme Court said there is little reason to doubt that sometimes large contributions will work actual corruption of our political system and no reason to question the existence of a corresponding suspicion among voters. Do you know that the Republican Party is now taking -- setting up a mechanism for this huge soft money thing. The Democrats are also. We're talking about hundreds of millions of dollars, if not billions, that are going to be washing around in this next presidential campaign usually in the form of negative ads. And don't you think we as candidates ought to say we will have nothing to do with that corruption of our system? I'm the only guy that has a commercial running that morph's Bill Clinton's face into mine. I believe that we do have a problem and that is that there is a growing gap between the haves and the have-nots in America, those that are able to take part in this information technology and those that haven't. We took a major step forward when we decided to wire every school and library in America to the Internet. That's a good program. We have to have step two, three and four, which means good equipment, good teachers and good classrooms. Now, I would do it directly, but there are lots of ways that you can encourage corporations, who in their own self-interest would want to provide -- receive tax benefits, would receive credit, and many other ways for being involved in the schools and upgrading the quality of the equipment that they have, the quality of the students, and thereby providing a much needed, well-trained work force. It was a government program that invented the Internet. I think it was Al Gore. I invented television. Sir. Well, I think maybe President Clinton's looks too much like mine. He looked too much like me when he signed the Welfare Reform Act. He looked too much like me in a number of shifts that he made to the center for political expediency. Look, we all know we've got a ticking time bomb out there, and it's called the Social Security trust fund, Bernie. And starting in 2014 there will be more money going out than in. According to Senator Gregg, Governor Bush's campaign chairman here in New Hampshire, there's a $5 trillion unfunded liability out there in the form of the Social Security trust fund. It has to -- if we can put the money in quick, then we will be able to allow people to invest their payroll taxes into investments of their choosing and make a huge amount of difference in the solvency of their retirement fund. This is a very, very important issue, because in good times -- in good times, not bad times -- when we have a surplus, we should give the middle-income Americans a tax break. They need it. They pay as much as 40 percent of their income in taxes. But at the same time, people in New Hampshire are telling me, Senator McCain, save Social Security, put some money into Medicare, and pay down that debt, and don't put that burden on future generations of Americans. More young Americans believe Elvis is alive than they believe that they'll ever see a social security check. Yes. Sure, which is one trillion. Less than what? Less than projected? That's why I have percentages of the surplus to be put in. Sixty-two percent of the surplus to be put into social security, 23 percent in the tax cuts, 10 percent into Medicare and the remainder into paying down the debt. And I agree with you, these estimates are economists' words for guesses. And I'm not positive that we will continue to have the surpluses as they are presently envisioned. So, therefore, we want to be cautious. I think it's conservative in good times to put money into Social Security; it's conservative to pay down the debt; and it's conservative clearly to try to save Medicare; and at the same time, give these tax breaks to American families, including making that tax flatter up and up and up. I want to lift the 15 percent tax bracket up to couples making $70,000 a year. I think we can do it. I voted to convict the president of the United States on grounds that he lied under oath. In fact, there was a discussion at the time as to whether we expect the same standards of a member of the military as the president of the United States. No, we don't expect the same standards, we expect a higher standards from members -- from the president of the United States than members of the military. The people of this country are suffering from Clinton fatigue, and it's because they want someone who will look them in the eye and tell them the truth. That's the pledge I've made to the people of New Hampshire and the people of this country. George, strangely enough. We all know Washington spends too much money. In fact, last November there was an incredible bill passed full of earmarked pork barrel spending. They spent the then-$14 billion surplus that was going to -- supposed to be there for this year. And you said you supported that bill, and that you sign it as president of the United States. I voted against it, said as president I would veto it, and saw it as one of the most egregious practices. Tell me, what corporate loopholes would you close? And what spending cuts would you make? George, you seem to depict the role of the president as a hapless bystander. This president is threatening to shut down the government and vetoing bills to force the Congress to spend more money. An active president of the United States -- i.e., me -- will veto bills and threaten to shut down the government to make them spend less money. Look, you have been talking about how you want to increase the military. We don't have unlimited funds. Tell me, is there any military programs that you would reduce spending on? And I appreciate new dedication to reducing the debt. I -- your plan... ... and I could have written myself. And I congratulate you. Well, first of all, George, if you're saying that I'm like Al Gore, then you're spinning like Bill Clinton. OK. Let's -- let's clear that one up. Second of all, I believe that we need choice and competition in schools. The problem with yours is you give too much power to the federal bureaucracy in Washington. I want the states to make those decisions. I want to encourage charter schools. I want to have a test voucher program using ethanol, gas and oil subsidies and sugar subsidies so we can start a test program in the poorest school districts in every state in America. You want to use funds from public education. I don't want to take funds from public education, I want to take it from the subsidies that you support. You went to Iowa and supported ethanol subsidies. You went to Florida and support the sugar subsidies. And we know how you feel about oil and gas subsidies. That's why I had the question about which subsidy would you do away with. But the point is that if we have choice and competitions, charter schools, voucher programs, merit pay for teachers based on student performance, then we will give every American parent the choice that they deserve. And that is to send their child to the school of their choice. And that's an important element in any overall education program and proposal. And moms and dads and kids deserve a lot better than what they're getting today. George, as a governor you should understand and I thought you would cherish the rights and authority of the state rather than handing it over to Washington. Your proposal has that decision made by some nameless, faceless bureaucrat in Washington, D.C. They're the ones that tell the states they're not meeting the standards. I want the folks in my state to set the standards and tell them when they're meeting the standards. That's the critical part. No, you have the federal bureaucracy make it. But the overall problem too is that you're asking -- you're asking to -- money to take out of public education for vouchers when they need that money. Let's -- let's kill off that sugar subsidy, let's kill off that ethanol subsidy that helps nobody except perhaps Archer Daniels Midland. And let's take that money and put it into the education of our children. That's where we can really help parents in America. You know, Mr. Keyes, you attacked me earlier on about my position on defending the rights of the unborn. I want to tell you something. I've seen enough killing in my life. I know how precious human life is. And I don't need a lecture from you. The next time, try decaf. I don't know, I love debates. They're all fun. And the more the merrier. It's fine with me. By the way, George, we've had several offers for you and I to debate one on one. I've accepted them. I hope you will... Right. We can include them, and we can exclude them. We can have lots of debates. We've had several that they've just asked you and me to engage in. Look, it's an important part of the political process. I think it's a great chance for people to really get to know the candidates. It's part of this political process. And I enjoy it. And I hope we can have lots of them. Well said. Help me out, George... This court ruling is a magnificent affirmation of the efforts that I and reformers have been making for many years. And you know, Governor Bush says that it's unilateral disarmament if we get the special interests out of Washington. I see it as a clear road to victory. Because when I'm in the debate with Al Gore, I'm going to turn to Al Gore and I'm going to say, You and Bill Clinton debased the institutions of government in 1996 when you were engaged in reprehensible conduct, and then you said there was no controlling legal authority. I'm going to give you a controlling legal authority. And I'm going to make what they did illegal. And, George, when you're in that debate, you're going to stand there and you'll have nothing to say because you're defending this system. You know, you've said that it's bad for our party if we have campaign finance reform. I've always had the belief that's what good for our country is good for our party. Because there's an iron triangle in Washington, D.C., my friends, that have deprived you of your representation. It's big money and lobbyists and legislation that deprive you of your representation. I'm going to break that iron triangle. They're scared to death down in Washington, in the lobbying community, because they know it's not going to be business as usual. And if there's anybody around that wants business as usual, they don't want to vote for John McCain. I'm not proud when the Republican Party is taking $7 million from the tobacco companies. I'm appalled when I hear of these new setups of millions and millions of uncontrolled money that will never be disclosed. We know what happened in '96; Chinese money flowed into the United States of America and our national security was compromised. That's wrong. That's wrong. Until the last breath I draw, I'll give the government back to the American people. You know and I know that labor gives millions of dollars... ... and it would be effective, also. Fine, I'll be glad to. Well, I mean look, we know what happened. We know what's happening. It's now legal in America for a Chinese army-owned corporation, with a subsidiary in the United States of America, to give unlimited amounts of money to an American political campaign. I don't know how you defend that. We know that the labor bosses go down with the big checks. We know the trial lawyers go down with the big checks. We would ban that. Clearly we want paycheck protection, but we really we also know what's going on with some of your people right now. They're setting up soft money to be used in the general -- at least the media reports -- in the general campaign. My friends, we've got to fix this system before it lurches out of control, and young Americans won't take part in the political process. We had the lowest voter turnout in history in the 1998 election. These young people need to be brought back into the political process. I'll do that. This may be the last time I have a chance to talk directly to the people of New Hampshire. My dear friends, thank you for letting Cindy and me be your temporary neighbors. This has been one of the most wonderful and uplifting experiences in my life. I will cherish this memory always. I just had my 103rd town hall meeting in Plymouth Armory, and it, like every other, was an enlightening and wonderful experience for me. I'm grateful. I promise you again, I will always tell the truth. I'll reform the government. And I'll inspire a generation of Americans to commit themselves to causes greater than their self-interest. And I thank you. It's neither the intention nor the implication of the ad. The ad states clearly what I believe, and that is that I am fully qualified, I am the best prepared to lead this nation in the next century in very dangerous times. Unfortunately, this administration has conducted a feckless, photo-op foreign policy for which we may have to pay a very heavy price in the future in American blood and treasure. I have a coherent, cohesive concept of what I want the world to look like and what the interests and the values are and where the threats lie. I understand the problems of the men and women in the military. I think it's an absolute disgrace that there's 15,000 -- 12,000 proud, brave, young enlisted families that are on food stamps in the military. There will be no food stamp military when I am president of the United States. I am simply stating and will repeat: I am fully prepared to be president of the United States. No, it's not a handicap; it's not at all. But this is the first administration with the president of the United States and the secretary of defense and the secretary of state that have never spent on minute wearing the uniform of the armed services of the United States, and I promise you that won't happen on my watch. I would think so, because then we could eliminate quotas which I think neither helps the beneficiary nor improves the effort to improve equality in America. But I also think that it's very important that we preserve our rich heritage. In my state, Hispanic heritage has made us wonderful and great and noble. And I want to preserve that. I also want to underscore the fact that we still have a lot of people down at the economic -- bottom rung of the economic ladder that need a lot of help and a lot of assistance no matter what their ethnic makeup is. And we have to address this issue. I think -- I think we've pretty well massaged that. I'm proud of my pro-life record in public life. I'm the only one here who has gone to the floor of the Senate and voted in the preservation of the life of the unborn. I have worked very had for the ban of partial birth abortion. I have sought for approval and legislation requiring parental consent and parental notification. I am proud of that pro-life record and I will continue to maintain it. I will not draw my children into this discussion. Because unlike you, I have a 17-year voting record and record of service to this country, including doing everything that I can to preserve the rights of the unborn. I have spoken as eloquently as I can on that issue. I am proud of my record. And that record, I will stand on. And I am completely comfortable of the fact that as the leader of a pro-life party, with a pro-life position, that I will persuade -- which is what really this is all about -- to have young Americans understand the importance of the preservation of the rights of the unborn. Gary...  The United States Supreme Court issued a decision day before yesterday concerning campaign finance reform. It was a marvelous decision. It affirmed everything that I have fought for, including the fact, in the words of one judge, money is property, not free speech. We know the corruption that has taken place in the Clinton and Gore campaign as a result of the 1996 election and the unlimited campaign contributions. We know how important it is now to have an opportunity to enact real, meaningful campaign finance reform. I'd like your views on that very important Supreme Court decision. The Supreme Court said there is little reason to doubt that sometimes large contributions will work actual corruption of our political system and no reason to question the existence of a corresponding suspicion among voters. Do you know that the Republican Party is now taking -- setting up a mechanism for this huge soft money thing. The Democrats are also. We're talking about hundreds of millions of dollars, if not billions, that are going to be washing around in this next presidential campaign usually in the form of negative ads. And don't you think we as candidates ought to say we will have nothing to do with that corruption of our system? I'm the only guy that has a commercial running that morph's Bill Clinton's face into mine. I believe that we do have a problem and that is that there is a growing gap between the haves and the have-nots in America, those that are able to take part in this information technology and those that haven't. We took a major step forward when we decided to wire every school and library in America to the Internet. That's a good program. We have to have step two, three and four, which means good equipment, good teachers and good classrooms. Now, I would do it directly, but there are lots of ways that you can encourage corporations, who in their own self-interest would want to provide -- receive tax benefits, would receive credit, and many other ways for being involved in the schools and upgrading the quality of the equipment that they have, the quality of the students, and thereby providing a much needed, well-trained work force. It was a government program that invented the Internet. I think it was Al Gore. I invented television. Sir. Well, I think maybe President Clinton's looks too much like mine. He looked too much like me when he signed the Welfare Reform Act. He looked too much like me in a number of shifts that he made to the center for political expediency. Look, we all know we've got a ticking time bomb out there, and it's called the Social Security trust fund, Bernie. And starting in 2014 there will be more money going out than in. According to Senator Gregg, Governor Bush's campaign chairman here in New Hampshire, there's a $5 trillion unfunded liability out there in the form of the Social Security trust fund. It has to -- if we can put the money in quick, then we will be able to allow people to invest their payroll taxes into investments of their choosing and make a huge amount of difference in the solvency of their retirement fund. This is a very, very important issue, because in good times -- in good times, not bad times -- when we have a surplus, we should give the middle-income Americans a tax break. They need it. They pay as much as 40 percent of their income in taxes. But at the same time, people in New Hampshire are telling me, Senator McCain, save Social Security, put some money into Medicare, and pay down that debt, and don't put that burden on future generations of Americans. More young Americans believe Elvis is alive than they believe that they'll ever see a social security check. Yes. Sure, which is one trillion. Less than what? Less than projected? That's why I have percentages of the surplus to be put in. Sixty-two percent of the surplus to be put into social security, 23 percent in the tax cuts, 10 percent into Medicare and the remainder into paying down the debt. And I agree with you, these estimates are economists' words for guesses. And I'm not positive that we will continue to have the surpluses as they are presently envisioned. So, therefore, we want to be cautious. I think it's conservative in good times to put money into Social Security; it's conservative to pay down the debt; and it's conservative clearly to try to save Medicare; and at the same time, give these tax breaks to American families, including making that tax flatter up and up and up. I want to lift the 15 percent tax bracket up to couples making $70,000 a year. I think we can do it. I voted to convict the president of the United States on grounds that he lied under oath. In fact, there was a discussion at the time as to whether we expect the same standards of a member of the military as the president of the United States. No, we don't expect the same standards, we expect a higher standards from members -- from the president of the United States than members of the military. The people of this country are suffering from Clinton fatigue, and it's because they want someone who will look them in the eye and tell them the truth. That's the pledge I've made to the people of New Hampshire and the people of this country. George, strangely enough. We all know Washington spends too much money. In fact, last November there was an incredible bill passed full of earmarked pork barrel spending. They spent the then-$14 billion surplus that was going to -- supposed to be there for this year. And you said you supported that bill, and that you sign it as president of the United States. I voted against it, said as president I would veto it, and saw it as one of the most egregious practices. Tell me, what corporate loopholes would you close? And what spending cuts would you make? George, you seem to depict the role of the president as a hapless bystander. This president is threatening to shut down the government and vetoing bills to force the Congress to spend more money. An active president of the United States -- i.e., me -- will veto bills and threaten to shut down the government to make them spend less money. Look, you have been talking about how you want to increase the military. We don't have unlimited funds. Tell me, is there any military programs that you would reduce spending on? And I appreciate new dedication to reducing the debt. I -- your plan... ... and I could have written myself. And I congratulate you. Well, first of all, George, if you're saying that I'm like Al Gore, then you're spinning like Bill Clinton. OK. Let's -- let's clear that one up. Second of all, I believe that we need choice and competition in schools. The problem with yours is you give too much power to the federal bureaucracy in Washington. I want the states to make those decisions. I want to encourage charter schools. I want to have a test voucher program using ethanol, gas and oil subsidies and sugar subsidies so we can start a test program in the poorest school districts in every state in America. You want to use funds from public education. I don't want to take funds from public education, I want to take it from the subsidies that you support. You went to Iowa and supported ethanol subsidies. You went to Florida and support the sugar subsidies. And we know how you feel about oil and gas subsidies. That's why I had the question about which subsidy would you do away with. But the point is that if we have choice and competitions, charter schools, voucher programs, merit pay for teachers based on student performance, then we will give every American parent the choice that they deserve. And that is to send their child to the school of their choice. And that's an important element in any overall education program and proposal. And moms and dads and kids deserve a lot better than what they're getting today. George, as a governor you should understand and I thought you would cherish the rights and authority of the state rather than handing it over to Washington. Your proposal has that decision made by some nameless, faceless bureaucrat in Washington, D.C. They're the ones that tell the states they're not meeting the standards. I want the folks in my state to set the standards and tell them when they're meeting the standards. That's the critical part. No, you have the federal bureaucracy make it. But the overall problem too is that you're asking -- you're asking to -- money to take out of public education for vouchers when they need that money. Let's -- let's kill off that sugar subsidy, let's kill off that ethanol subsidy that helps nobody except perhaps Archer Daniels Midland. And let's take that money and put it into the education of our children. That's where we can really help parents in America. You know, Mr. Keyes, you attacked me earlier on about my position on defending the rights of the unborn. I want to tell you something. I've seen enough killing in my life. I know how precious human life is. And I don't need a lecture from you. The next time, try decaf. I don't know, I love debates. They're all fun. And the more the merrier. It's fine with me. By the way, George, we've had several offers for you and I to debate one on one. I've accepted them. I hope you will... Right. We can include them, and we can exclude them. We can have lots of debates. We've had several that they've just asked you and me to engage in. Look, it's an important part of the political process. I think it's a great chance for people to really get to know the candidates. It's part of this political process. And I enjoy it. And I hope we can have lots of them. Well said. Help me out, George... This court ruling is a magnificent affirmation of the efforts that I and reformers have been making for many years. And you know, Governor Bush says that it's unilateral disarmament if we get the special interests out of Washington. I see it as a clear road to victory. Because when I'm in the debate with Al Gore, I'm going to turn to Al Gore and I'm going to say, You and Bill Clinton debased the institutions of government in 1996 when you were engaged in reprehensible conduct, and then you said there was no controlling legal authority. I'm going to give you a controlling legal authority. And I'm going to make what they did illegal. And, George, when you're in that debate, you're going to stand there and you'll have nothing to say because you're defending this system. You know, you've said that it's bad for our party if we have campaign finance reform. I've always had the belief that's what good for our country is good for our party. Because there's an iron triangle in Washington, D.C., my friends, that have deprived you of your representation. It's big money and lobbyists and legislation that deprive you of your representation. I'm going to break that iron triangle. They're scared to death down in Washington, in the lobbying community, because they know it's not going to be business as usual. And if there's anybody around that wants business as usual, they don't want to vote for John McCain. I'm not proud when the Republican Party is taking $7 million from the tobacco companies. I'm appalled when I hear of these new setups of millions and millions of uncontrolled money that will never be disclosed. We know what happened in '96; Chinese money flowed into the United States of America and our national security was compromised. That's wrong. That's wrong. Until the last breath I draw, I'll give the government back to the American people. You know and I know that labor gives millions of dollars... ... and it would be effective, also. Fine, I'll be glad to. Well, I mean look, we know what happened. We know what's happening. It's now legal in America for a Chinese army-owned corporation, with a subsidiary in the United States of America, to give unlimited amounts of money to an American political campaign. I don't know how you defend that. We know that the labor bosses go down with the big checks. We know the trial lawyers go down with the big checks. We would ban that. Clearly we want paycheck protection, but we really we also know what's going on with some of your people right now. They're setting up soft money to be used in the general -- at least the media reports -- in the general campaign. My friends, we've got to fix this system before it lurches out of control, and young Americans won't take part in the political process. We had the lowest voter turnout in history in the 1998 election. These young people need to be brought back into the political process. I'll do that. This may be the last time I have a chance to talk directly to the people of New Hampshire. My dear friends, thank you for letting Cindy and me be your temporary neighbors. This has been one of the most wonderful and uplifting experiences in my life. I will cherish this memory always. I just had my 103rd town hall meeting in Plymouth Armory, and it, like every other, was an enlightening and wonderful experience for me. I'm grateful. I promise you again, I will always tell the truth. I'll reform the government. And I'll inspire a generation of Americans to commit themselves to causes greater than their self-interest. And I thank you. Thank you. And thank you all for doing this tonight, Brit and Karen.  You know, a comment like that really makes me mad. [<i>laughs</i>] [<i>laughter</i>] The fact is, I have very close and dear friends in Arizona and in the Senate and in the House, and very dear friends all over America, I'm happy to say. Do I feel passionately about issues? Absolutely. When I see the Congress of the United States spend $6 billion on unnecessary, wasteful pork barrel spending, and we have 12,000 enlisted families, brave men and women, on food stamps, yeah, I get angry.  And you know, a lot of those young people have come up and said to me, "Thanks for fighting for me."  If everybody who wants the status quo in Washington wants to remain so, then I'm not their guy. But I can assure you, Karen, that I'm going to change the status quo in Washington. We're going to rid the government of the special interests, and from time to time those of us like Barry Goldwater and Morris Udall, who stand in an independent fashion, are going to break some china, but I'm very proud of my record of achievement.  Well, I think that that's testimony to the attractiveness of Governor Bush. I believe that I have significant support throughout the nation. Here in New Hampshire, we're doing very well. Again, I lodge no criticism at anyone in Washington, but it is very clear to all the lobbyists and the special influence people that run Washington now that if John McCain is president of the United States, things are going to be a lot different.  We're not going to have soft money; we're going to return the government to the people of this country who deserve it and who have lost it, and we're going to have young men and women involved again in the political process instead of become cynical and alienated, and I believe that I can motivate them to do so. But first, I'm going to clean up Washington.  Of course not. No, I am not.  Nor do I particularly let it be of concern to me. We're running a campaign that we're very happy with, and we're doing just fine.  And by the way, the best, I think, testimony into a politician is how the people of his state feel about him. I was just reelected last November with over 70 percent of the vote, including 55 percent of the Hispanic vote, including the support that I'm particularly honored by of all 25 Indian tribes in my state. People in my state expect people to act in an independent and principled fashion. That's a long tradition, and I've been trying to adhere to it, because I've got some significant examples that preceded me.   <b>Hume:</b> There is something, though, Senator, that leads to the failure of more of your Republican colleagues to endorse you, to the fact that you -- there are a number of Republicans in Arizona who have been critical of you. The governor has endorsed one of your rivals.  What's going on there, really, in your judgment?  Well, what's going on in Arizona is that the Republican mayors of Tucson and Phoenix and virtually every other Republican mayor in Arizona, every Republican supervisor, every Republican sheriff -- they are overwhelmingly in support of my candidacy, as are all the former party people, and I'm very pleased and proud. That's exactly what's going on, and we'll do very well in the state of Arizona, and thanks for asking. [<i>chuckles</i>]  [<i>chuckles</i>] Thanks.  Of course the Army has a place. And the Army, however, has not been able to restructure to meet the post-Cold War challenges.  All during the Cold War, the United States Army was geared to fight a tank battle on the plains of Central Europe. Now they have to be able to move from one place to another around the world quickly, and, once there, to beneficially affect the battlefield equation. They're not capable of doing that. A recent incident was an Army division was just declared unready for combat. That division was the 10th Mountain Division, Bob Dole's old division.  Yes, we need to restructure the military. We need to knock heads together in the military. I know how to do that because I've been there. And I also believe that we've got to rid the defense appropriations bills of pork barrel spending, waste, and incredible, almost criminal behavior like spending $325 million on an aircraft carrier that the Navy doesn't want or need. This has got to be fixed, and fixed soon, and particularly the men and women in the military.  The question is not spending more dollars; the question is spending money on programs and projects we need, eliminating those that we didn't. Look, we've been buying C-130s for 10 years. We're going to have a C-130 in every school yard in America. There's no need for much of the equipment we are purchasing, but the effect of the special interests in Washington and their big contributions can prevent us not only from buying the equipment we need, but taking care of the men and women in the military.  Recently in San Diego, at Camp Pendleton, enlisted Marines were standing in line for cartons of food.  That's a disgrace. I intend to fix it. In fact, it even makes me a little angry.  I share Mr. Greenspan's concern. And, by the way, I would not only reappoint Mr. Greenspan; if Mr. Greenspan should happen to die, God forbid, I would do like they did in the movie "Weekend at Bernie's." I'd prop him up and put a pair of dark glasses on him and keep him as long as we could. [<i>laughter</i>]  The fact is that Mr. Greenspan deserves great credit -- great credit -- for this economic recovery. He's been a steady hand. He's unintelligible, but he's been a very steady hand on the tiller, and I am a great admirer and an advocate of his policies and programs.  Let me just also go back just one second to this Chechnya situation, if I could. Look, there are severe implications to this. It's not just the Russians massacring some innocent people, which is terrible in itself, and fortunately, it's not in our living rooms. But it has implications in the region as far as oil and gas reserves are concerned, the Russian military reasserting itself, and the overthrow of a government in Georgia which was a remarkable little democracy under Mr. Shevardnadze -- a true hero. [<i>bell sounds</i>] So it's very -- this is a very serious situation.  We should cut off IMF funding, we should cut off IMF loans, we should make it very clear to the Russians that this is serious business, it has significant implications, and it can affect a wide -- [<i>bell sounds</i>] -- gamut of relations between our two nations.  Oh. I'm afraid that it's becoming that, but I don't pretend to be an expert on that.  I am very concerned about this rapid rise. I think all of us who observe it are, but I do have enormous faith and confidence in Mr. Greenspan, and I would heed any warnings that come out of his mouth, and I will pay close attention.  Finally -- could I just go back to Social Security -- take 62 percent of the surplus, put it in a lock box, don't let the government touch it, even under the guise of an emergency. We just spent four-and-a-half billion dollars in the guise of emergency to conduct the year 2000 census -- we didn't know the census was coming -- and allow people to invest their savings and their tax dollars into savings of their choice. That will save Social Security, you don't have to raise the retirement age.  We need a Patients Bill of Rights, and the reason why we haven't gotten it through the Congress is because on the Democrat side, the trial lawyers have them in their control and they'll want to sue anybody for anything under any circumstance. On the Republican side, we're in the grip of the huge money from the insurance companies and the HMOs -- the typical gridlock which has caused Americans to have such a low opinion of what goes on in Washington.  The Internet should not be taxed. The Internet should not be taxed. The Internet is the greatest thing that's happened to the world, somewhere between -- a combination between the invention of the printing press and the industrial revolution. It has unlimited potential to spread knowledge, information and freedom throughout the world, and economic development. And the sales taxes, as a result of the increase of the Internet commerce, even though there's a moratorium, have increased. And I believe that that's ample testimony that the Internet will increase sales taxes, and the governors are incredibly short-sighted when they want to tax this baby in its cradle. [<i>bell sounds</i>]  Obviously the HMOs need to be made whole. We need to spend more money to make sure that they do. We have added more money for Medicare and Medicaid payments in the last emergency supplemental -- [<i>laughs</i>] -- that we passed. All of those thing have to be done, but I also believe that we have to take care of patients first. And if patients are not well-treated in HMOs, then obviously then the HMOs are not going to be sought out by them.  Again, on the Internet, we need to install -- we are installing in every school and library in America filtering software that would filter out according to community standards the objectionable material. That's the way we resolve this issue of such a flood of pornography. And we are wiring those schools and libraries at taxpayers' expense.  Healing the breach that exists between the American people and the government today; restoring confidence in government by young Americans so that I as president of the United States can motivate them to serve causes greater than their self-interest.  On the issue of the surplus, three years ago, every economist in America was saying that we're going to have deficits as far as the eye can see.  Now those same economists are saying we're going to have surpluses as far as the eye can see, authenticating Harry Truman's assertion that he wanted a one-armed economist because they always say "on the one hand" and "on the other hand." I wouldn't count on these surpluses, although I'm very -- very optimistic about the future of the economy. The difference between my tax cut proposals, which have to do with the marriage penalty, the inheritance taxes, earnings tests and breaks for lower-income Americans is that I pay for them. We eliminate corporate welfare and we cut unnecessary spending. That's the way you should do tax cuts.  I want to thank you, Karen and Brit and Channel 9 and Fox. I want to thank you all. I've had a lot of fun tonight. It's been good. It's been a great experience.  I'm running for president of the United States because I believe the United States sits astride the world militarily and economically in the most powerful position ever seen in the history of the world. This is an exciting time. We have prospects for prosperity, for growth, for leadership throughout the world, and the president of the United States can lead the world to a far, far better place and a far better century than the one that is now passing.   I'm running for president because I want to reform government. I want to reform education so that every parent in America has the same choice as the wealthy parent: to send their child to the school of their choosing.  I want to reform the military so that we can again be able to meet the post-Cold War challenges, rather than have one that is structured for the past and not able to cope with the future.  I want to reform the tax code, which is 35 -- which is 44,000 pages long. I can't do that unless we rid Washington of the special interest which has deprived Americans of their voice in Washington. The special interests rule and, unfortunately, the public interest has been diminished.  This has caused young Americans to be beset by cynicism and alienation. Young Americans believe that we don't reflect their hopes and dreams and aspirations. I want to heal that breach. I want to make them represented again, and I want America again to be proud of its government. And that way I can inspire young Americans to commit themselves to causes greater than their self interests.  Please join me in this great crusade. I am prepared to be president of the United States. Thank you. : Well, I don't think so, Doyle. I think the fact is that I have rejected the leadership of these two individuals. They have led our party in the wrong direction. We have lost the last two presidential elections. We have lost the last two congressional elections. The message of intolerance and exclusion rather than inclusion is directly in contradiction to the message that I have been trying to send around America and that is: Come to our proud, conservative banner. We will reform the government. We'll give it back to you. But ours is a message of inclusion. Ours is a message that says: Come take part in this noble experiment. This is the greatest opportunity that America has had. And I want all of you there. And that's the Ronald Reagan-Theodore Roosevelt-Abraham Lincoln tradition. And I am positive that Christian conservatives all over America will flock to that banner. They will desert, I hope, the intolerant and wrong-headedness of Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson. I would love to follow the example of Theodore Roosevelt. He's my ultimate hero. But in this particular example, no, I am a loyal Republican. The Republican Party is my home. What I want to do is lead the Republican Party back, back to where we were before, back when Ronald Reagan was able to assemble a coalition of the people we used to call the Reagan Democrats, proud conservatives who shared our vision for the future of this country. And that's really what I am trying to do with this party. I am loyal no matter who our nominee is, I will support that nominee. Well first of all, I share their values and their goals of the rank and file of the so-called Christian right. As I have said, I am a proud conservative with a strong conservative record in the tradition of Ronald Reagan and Theodore Roosevelt and Abraham Lincoln. And I am proud of that record. I am proud that I have been one who has supported many of the issues that have to do with family values. Where I have differed in the past and continue to differ with Mr. Falwell and Mr. Robertson is on issues such as the issue of President Clinton. I voted to impeach President Clinton. I don't believe he's a murderer. Mr. Falwell believes that he's a murderer. Mr. Robertson has espoused some cockamamie theories about the Freemasons. I believe that they have led the -- some very good and wonderful people in a message of intolerance. We share the same values, but their practice of politics is exclusionary and not inclusionary. I want the party of Abraham Lincoln, not the party of Bob Jones. I have no idea, but I know that they actively supported him. I know that they made phone calls on his behalf which accused a good and decent man, Warren Rudman, of being a bigot, a vicious bigot and many other things. But look, those phone calls were made, they are done. I'm interested in the issues of the day and stop the squabbling and address the issues of education, health care, the military and others that are important to the future of this country. Well, I think you would agree with that if you believed that the power of the teachers' unions cannot be broken. The power of the teachers' unions in my state of Arizona fought tooth and nail against charter schools, yet we prevailed. And the best schools in my state happen to be charter schools. I believe that it's a serious mistake to allow some bureaucrat in Washington to decide about the standards to be set by the people of the state of Arizona. We have a wonderful state superintendent of education. Her name is Lisa Graham Keegan. I think she's perfectly capable, as are the parents and the teachers, to be able to make those decisions. I want those decisions made not by some Washington bureaucrat but by somebody who knows my children's names. And that's all got to do with local and parental control. Sure. Probably in leading the effort in my -- being involved in the effort in my state for reform in many areas, supporting various education programs, a member of the Education Committee in the House of Representatives years ago and being part of those efforts as well, using the bully pulpit in favor of the examples that are set in my state and by other reformers in the school system in America -- I mean, that are reformers of the school system in America. I'm glad to have been involved in the -- in the military to teachers' programs... ...where people who leave the military can become teachers if they're qualified to do so. Judy, I think I need my 30 seconds. Yes, OK. All right. Doyle, I think you have made a very narrow interpretation of what I call rogue state rollback, and that means that you do whatever you can, whether it be the use of propaganda, whether it be used to organize groups outside the country, whether it be arming and training and equipping, depending on what the possibilities are. And by the way, the Congress of the United States three years ago passed the Iraqi Liberation Act which calls for basically exactly the same thing, so I am sure that was taken into consideration then. No, this is an attempt to avoid U.S. military involvement. We do what we can to overthrow these countries which pose a clear and present danger to the security of the United States of America -- clearly, Saddam Hussein. If you read any periodical, including the L.A. Times, will tell you that he is attempting to acquire weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. That's a direct threat to the United States' national security. So you really kind of have two choices: you react militarily, risking American lives, or do you try to overthrow that government, which is by the way, according now to existing laws. I would support such... Thank you. I accept the fundamental principle, Doyle, that they pose a threat to the United States' national security. When North Korea tests a three-stage missile over Japan, they pose a threat, and when there's transfer of technology which allows nations to acquire these weapons of mass destruction, they are a threat. I am willing to explore all options, all options to prevent that threat from ever being realized. And clearly those are countries that threaten our security and this administration has conducted a feckless photo-op foreign policy for which the next president of the United States may pay a very heavy price in American blood and treasure. Well, I don't think it should be a source of worry. But anything is fair game, as I have found out during this campaign. The fact is, I respect Bill Bennett's views. He has criticized me on several times in the past, and I am sure that criticism has been constructive. Look, I have been in this campaign for 14 months now. I believe that I have conducted it with honor, with dignity, and in a way that has made me and the people surrounding me proud. That's why we have attracted so many young people, so much enthusiasm to our banner, so many people who have never been involved in politics before. Enthusiasm and the commitment to young people show that my message and my temperament and my view and my vision for the future of the country is something that they're able to look up to, respect, admire, and be part of. We're changing the face of politics in America, and I am very proud of this campaign and the way we've all conducted it. I think it was straight talk because I wanted to tell people exactly what Governor Bush had done. I did not accuse him of being an anti-Catholic bigot. It did not say anything except he was there and waited three weeks before he repudiated it. But the fact is, that that was a factual and fair statement and one that I stand by, unlike many of the phone calls that are being made as we speak, and the negative ads that are being broadcast all over television. But I am not here to squabble about that. I am here to talk about the issues that are important for the day. And that's why I am proud of this campaign. And I stand by the words in that message. Well, of course I would. And the fact is that there has been a strategic ambiguity, but the person who destroyed the strategic ambiguity was President Clinton, when he went to China and called Jiang Zemin and the Chinese his strategic partner, and he destroyed the delicate balance of ambiguity which is causing many of these problems now, which is again an example of the fecklessness of the Clinton foreign policy. Of course, I would tell the Taiwanese that they should observe the one-China policy, which calls for peaceful unification -- reunification. Of course, the Taiwanese will react because the people of Taiwan and the government of Taiwan recognize that the provocation of China would only lead to increased tensions. So, yes, obviously I would exercise our suasion over them. But have no doubt as to why we're in the situation we're in, and that's because of the -- of President Clinton's trip to China, where this long-standing strategic ambiguity was shattered by intemperate remarks by the president of the United States.  Not no matter what. It would be careful assessment by the Department of Defense and the State Department as to what -- as we -- as has been our tradition in the past. But I'll tell you what I would do without a doubt, and that is that I would push the development of sea-based missile defense systems as -- from the U.S. standpoint, so that in case of tensions in the region I could move those ships very close but in international waters and make it clear to the Chinese that the consequences of aggression against Taiwan far, far exceed anything they might gain from committing that aggression. I won't waste more than five. The fact is I am a proud pro-life candidate. It's a very, very difficult issue that was raised concerning one's family decisions. I am pro-life, and that's my position, and I'm sorry that Mr. Keyes continues to misconstrue it, but that's his privilege. I would like to also comment, no matter how Governor Bush slices it, it's federal control of education that his plan is about. And finally, that description of campaign finance reform is one of the most bizarre that I have experienced. He is now saying... All right. Thank you. Well, I think plenty of them respect and admire him more than me. But the major reason and the majority reason why most of them, obviously, in my view, are very concerned about my candidacy, including being frightened is because I am taking on the establishment and the iron triangle, and everybody knows that, and campaign finance reform is a key element of that, and Governor Bush just said that he wants unlimited contributions from individuals. Maybe that's -- explains why there have been the sleepovers in Austin at the governor's mansion by the pioneers. Maybe that's why it's being set up, the apparatus, right now of the so-called pioneers and other apparatus to raise unlimited amounts of money to funnel into this political campaign coming up in the same way that Clinton and Gore did. That's a matter of published reports. Campaign finance reform is the key element and an important element and a vital element if we're going to give the government back to the people, and if you're going to allow people like Bernard Schwartz of Loral to give a million dollars... ...and technology is transferred to China, we have got a continuing big problem in America. Good. I don't think so. By the way, George, if I am ringing it like the dinner bell, you have got both feet in the trough because you have raised five times the amount of money in Washington that I have. Look, I get along with them. Two-hundred-and-thirty-four pieces of legislation has borne my name. I'm proud of many major pieces of legislation playing a major role in foreign defense policy, Y2K product liability reform. My committee churns out more legislation than any other. I am very proud of my record and the work that I have done with all of my colleagues, and if I have a mandate, they're going to follow. Not as nearly as well as I should, Judy. My wife, Cindy, is a whiz, and when I want to find out what's on CNN, or the New York Times, or the Washington Post, or other Communist periodicals...[<i>laughter</i>]... I always go to it. But the phenomenal thing about the Internet as far as we're concerned, we have gotten like $7 million in contributions over the Internet. It's been marvelous. Governor Bush talks about the interests in Washington, I think he's gotten $700,000. Seven million dollars, people just coming in on the Internet and contributing to our campaign because they want reform. They want the government back and they want it back in their hands, and that's what this campaign is all about, and I'm exuberant about giving it to them. As we approach next Tuesday, which may be a seminal event in this campaign, I hope you'll ask yourselves a couple of questions: Who is most fully prepared to be president of the United States? And who is most capable of winning a victory in November and defeating Al Gore? I am proud of the campaign we have run, which has attracted people from everywhere, young and old, rich and poor to our banner, under the banner of proud Reagan conservatism, has expanded the base of our party in a way that we haven't experienced since Ronald Reagan. I assure you and I commit to you that I will restore honor and dignity to the White House, and then I will inspire a generation of young Americans to commit themselves to causes greater than their self-interests. I am very proud of this campaign. I am very proud of the fact that we have tried to build America up and tear no one down. I ask for your support and your vote next Tuesday, and I thank you for having me on this program. I have, first of all, no idea. But the fact is that again my job as chairman of the Committee of Commerce, Science and Transportation is to oversight bureaucracies that are supposed to be serving the people. The Federal Communications Commission has not been doing that. Of all the times when I have weighed in, I have asked them to do their duty and to expedite the procedures as they are laid out under the law and according to existing regulations. I will continue to do that job. And when a constituent, a person of mine who has trouble, or a citizen of this country who can't get a reaction or an answer from a bureaucracy that is paid for with their tax dollars, I believe that people like me should weigh in, particularly when it is my responsibility as the chairman of the committee. I fully understand --  Thank you. [<i>applause</i>]  Yes, but quotas have made it worse.  I believe the people of South Carolina made a very wise decision when they rejected video poker in their state. It was very harmful -- [<i>applause</i>] -- it was very harmful and very addictive.  The problem with these lotteries is that the poor people are the ones who buy the lottery tickets, and it is a very regressive tax. But I would leave the decision up to the people of South Carolina --  -- and I will respect and admire their decision.  The American farmer is the most productive and efficient farmer in the world. He or she can compete anywhere in the world as long as we open the markets to those products. Isolationism and protectionism doesn't work. We should not subsidize ethanol or sugar or any other crop, because then that hurts the American consumer. But I will lower the barriers to United States products coming in the United States in return for any nation that will lower their barriers to United States products, particularly our magnificent and wonderful agricultural products. I am proud of the American farmer. Our trade with Canada has increased, our trade with Mexico has increased, and our farmers have benefited from it. And I believe that one of our jobs is to protect the family farmer in America. And this is the best way to do it. [<i>applause</i>]  Several years ago, Congress enacted a pay raise, and my constituents didn't think we needed it. I don't know if that was a personal view or of Congress in general. Ever since then, I've been giving my pay raises to charity, and I think that comes out to around $30,000, $30,000 or $40,000. Cindy also and I have a very large charitable trust.  But, you know, I'm not here to hype my book, "Faith of My Fathers," $24.95, Random House; been on the best-seller list for four months. I'm not here to hype that at all, because I wouldn't even mention it except it had the most remote connection, and that is that I got $500,000 advance from Random House. I gave my half of that, which I shared with my co-author, to charity. And I continue to give those proceeds to charity. [<i>applause</i>]  No, I will not, Alan. And you know very well that when people like General Colin Powell, General Norman Schwarzkopf, and the military leaders that you and I respect say that this policy is a good one -- by the way, it should not be abandoned, as the two leading presidential candidates on the Democratic -- it's a disgraceful statement on the part of Senator Bradley and Vice President Gore to say that they would only appoint a chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff who would accept gays in the military. That is a total destruction of the entire concept of the military. And we should, as Americans, reject such a thing because of the harmful effects it will have on the military of the United States of America. No, I will not. I will support the present policy. [<i>applause</i>]  Well, for a long time, I thought the biggest mistake I made in my life might have been when I was sitting in the ready room of an aircraft carrier in the Philippines and a guy came on board and said, "We're looking for volunteers to switch over to another carrier." [<i>laughter</i>] Something happened to my arm.  But in reality, the biggest mistake that I made in my life was attending a meeting with four other senators and four regulators because of the appearance of impropriety. It's something that will always be a mark on my record and something that people will judge me for for the rest of my life.  Well, Governor, I know your people are running around saying that your tax cut is bigger than mine, that yours is bigger than mine. [<i>laughter</i>] I think the phrase they use is the tax gap between Bush and McCain. I'm more concerned about the surplus gap. It's fiscally irresponsible to promise a huge tax cut that is based on a surplus that we may not have.  My tax plan is fiscally conservative. It's about the same as yours for middle-income and lower-income Americans. It places a top priority on saving Social Security. It offers a needed tax break for middle-income people. And it begins paying down the national debt. My friends, we ought to pay down the national debt. [<i>applause</i>] George, the American people are tired of people who make promises, who make promises about tax cuts that they can't keep.  Can I respond to that?  You know, George, I've always thought that what's best for the country is best for the party. The real scandal in Washington, along with Monica Lewinsky, was the debasement of every institution of government. You are defending an illegal system. You are defending a system that has caused the debasement of every institution of government, and it's got to be stopped.  Al Gore said there's no controlling legal authority. Well, I'll give him a controlling legal authority. With John McCain as president, there will be a controlling legal authority. It is now legal in the United States of America for a Chinese Army-owned corporation to give unlimited amounts of money to an American political campaign -- we're awash in it.  You've got a supporter right now that's running attack ads on me --  And by the way, I wish you'd change the picture. And these attack ads are being by people that he won't even disclose.  It's interesting in the last debate and through most of this one, there has been no discussion of foreign policy, Steve. I think it's still important. I think the state of our military is still important. I think the fact that we have a president of the United States, a National Security Adviser, a Secretary of State and a Secretary of Defense, none of whom have ever spent one minute wearing the uniform of the United States of America's military is a disgrace. And we're going to change it. [<i>applause</i>]  I want to -- I want to talk to you about Russia. You're concerned about Russia, I'm concerned about Russia. We're concerned about Chechnya and we're concerned about the Caucasus and Georgia, and the oil and gas reserves that are there, and I'm particularly interested in your views of Mr. Putin and what we can expect, and how you would handle our relations with Russia at this particular moment.  I do.  If we had had Internet taxation over the holiday, American citizens would have paid an additional $600 million in taxes. This Internet tax moratorium should be made permanent, it should be made permanent today. The American people are taking advantage of a wonderful new opportunity with this technology. We should do everything we can to encourage it.  There was a recent study that showed if we put in this sales tax, that we would have impacted the Internet by as much as 24 percent. The American people deserve to have this tax moratorium made permanent. And anybody who is opposed to it is obviously in support of a massive tax increase.  I want to thank all of you for being here tonight. I'm a proud conservative Republican with a 17-year conservative record. I want to return the government to the people. I want to reform the institutions of government, education and the military, the tax code. I want to get the influence of the big money and the trial lawyers and the labor unions out of our business and give the government back to you. And once we do that, then I will be able to inspire a generation of Americans to causes greater than their self-interest. Please join me in this great crusade. [<i>applause</i>] 